SUPPL Y CHAIN
MANAGEMENT
PROCUREMENT GUIDANCE
MARCH 2023
An introduction and practical toolset
for procurement practitioners
Published March 2023 – First Edition
Copyright © 2023
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
Disclaimer
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as
long as full attribution to this work is given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary
rights, should be addressed to:
Office of the Publisher
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC
20433 USA
Fax: 202-522-2422
Email: pubrights@worldbank.org
Common Abbreviations and
Defined Terms
This Section explains the common terms and abbreviations used in this Guidance. Defined terms are
written using capital letters throughout the Guidance.
Abbreviation/term Full terminology/definition
Bank IBRD and/or IDA (whether acting on its own account or in its capacity as
administrator of trust funds provided by other donors).
Bid An offer, by a firm or joint venture, in response to a Request for Bids to
provide the required Goods, Works or Non-consulting Services.
Bidder A firm or joint venture that submits a Bid for Goods, Works, or Non-consulting
Services in response to a Request for Bids.
Borrower A Borrower or recipient of Investment Project Financing (IPF) and any other
entity involved in the implementation of a project financed by IPF.
Consultant A variety of private entities, joint ventures, or individuals that provide
services of an advisory or professional nature. Where the Consultant is an
individual they are not engaged as an employee.
Consulting
Services
Covers a range of services that are of an advisory or professional nature
and are provided by Consultants.
These Services typically involve providing expert or strategic advice
e.g., management consultants, policy consultants or communications
consultants. Advisory and project related Consulting Services include, for
example: feasibility studies, project management, engineering services,
finance and accounting services, training and development.
Core Procurement
Principles
The Bank’s Core Procurement Principles as set out in Section III. C of the Bank
Policy: Procurement in IPF and Other Operational Procurement Matters.
Environmental and
Social Framework
(ESF)
The World Bank Environmental and Social Framework sets out the World
Bank’s commitment to sustainable development and the requirements
for managing environmental and social risks and impacts of investment
projects. The framework comprises:
◾ A Vision for Sustainable Development, which sets out the Bank’s
aspirations regarding environmental and social sustainability;
◾ The World Bank Environmental and Social Policy, the Environmental
and Social Directive, and the Directive on Addressing Risks and
Impacts on Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Individuals or Groups, which
set out the mandatory requirements that apply to the Bank; and
◾ The Environmental and Social Standards, together with their Annexes,
which set out mandatory requirements that apply to the Borrower.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
ii
Abbreviation/term Full terminology/definition
Fraud and
Corruption
The sanctionable practices of corruption, fraud, collusion, coercion and
obstruction defined in the Anti-Corruption Guidelines and reflected in
Annex IV, World Bank Procurement Regulations for Borrowers.
Goods A category of procurement that includes: commodities, raw material, machinery,
equipment, vehicles, Plant, and related services such as transportation,
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance.
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA International Development Association
In Writing This means communicated or recorded in written form. It includes, for example:
mail, e-mail, fax or communication through an electronic procurement system
(provided that the electronic system is accessible, secure, ensures integrity and
confidentiality, and has sufficient audit trail features).
Incoterms The international commercial terms for goods published by the
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC).
Inputs Products or services that are being transformed to create an end result (a
final product or service requested).
Investment Project
Financing (IPF)
The Bank’s financing of investment projects that aims to promote poverty
reduction and sustainable development. IPF supports projects with defined
development objectives, activities, and results, and disburses the proceeds
of Bank financing against specific eligible expenditures.
KPI Key performance indicator
Manufacturer A business entity producing (manufacturing) goods
Most
Advantageous
Bid/Proposal
The Bid/Proposal that meets the qualification criteria and has been
determined to be substantially responsive to the request for bids/request
for proposals document; and is also the highest ranked Bid/Proposal.
Non-Consulting
Services
Services which are not Consulting Services. Non-consulting Services are
normally Bid and contracted on the basis of performance of measurable
outputs, and for which performance standards can be clearly identified
and consistently applied. Examples include: drilling, aerial photography,
satellite imagery, mapping, and similar operations.
Output The final requested product or service, which has been created by the
transformation of inputs.
PESTLE A PESTLE (Political, Economic, Social, Technology, Legislative and
Environment) is an analysis tool for supporting assessment of each of
these factors.
Plant A category of procurement relating the provision of equipped facilities,
such as those executed on the basis of design, supply, installation,
commissioning, maintenance, modification, and protection.
Project
Procurement
Strategy for
Development
(PPSD)
A project-level strategy document, prepared by the Borrower, that
describes how Procurement in IPF operations will support the
development objectives of the project and deliver VfM.
iii
COMMON ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINED TERMS
Abbreviation/term Full terminology/definition
Prequalification The shortlisting process which can be used prior to inviting Request for
Bids in the procurement of Goods, Works or Non-consulting Services.
Procurement
Approach
Procurement approach is the overall design of “fit for purpose” procurement
to award contracts that deliver the Project Development Objectives and
Value for Money. This includes the procurement arrangements, procurement
risk management, contract strategy, market engagement, requirements
drafting and contract management (where appropriate).
Project
Development
Objectives
Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are set out in the approved
Project Concept Note and are considered mandatory unless analysis
demonstrates the need for adjustment.
Procurement
Documents
A generic term used to cover all Procurement Documents issued by the
Borrower soliciting applications/Bids/Proposals. Procurement Documents
include prequalification document, initial selection document, Request for
Bids document, Request for Proposal document, forms of contracts, and
any addenda.
Procurement
Objectives
Objectives derived from the analysis of the current approach and the
supply market. Objectives should be prioritized to identify those that need
to be addressed through the procurement strategy.
Procurement
Process
The whole Procurement lifecycle that starts with the identification of a
need and continues through planning, preparation of specifications/
requirements, budget considerations, selection, contract award, and
contract management. It ends on the last day of the warranty period.
Procurement
Regulations
The “World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers”.
Project Procurement
Strategy for
Development
(PPSD)
A project-level strategy document, prepared by the Borrower, that
describes how Procurement in IPF operations will support the
development objectives of the project and deliver VfM.
Proposal An offer, in response to a Request for Proposals, which may or may not
include price, by one party to provide Goods, Works, Non-consulting
Services or Consulting Services to another party.
Proposer An individual entity or joint venture that submits a Proposal for Goods, Works,
and Non-consulting Services in response to a Request for Proposals.
RFB Request for Bids as a selection method.
RFP Request for Proposals as a selection method.
RFQ Request for Quotation as a selection method.
Section A Section within this Guidance.
Standard
Procurement
Documents (SPDs)
Procurement documents issued by the Bank to be used by Borrowers for
IPF financed projects. These include, GPN, SPN, EOI, REOI, Prequalification
document, Initial Selection documents, RFB and RFP documents.
Supply Chain A supply chain captures all Organizations and activities that are responsible
for or can influence the process of delivering an outcome, e.g., the
successful delivery and completion of a project.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
iv
Abbreviation/term Full terminology/definition
Supply Chain
Flows
Processes through which information is communicated across companies
(information flows), through which products or services are created
(product flows), and through which payments are issued (financial flows).
Supply Chain
Management
(SCM)
Supply Chain Management (SCM) refers to the activities needed to provide
a final product or service, which involves the coordination of activities
starting with the raw materials and ending with the delivery of the final
product service to the end customer. At the end of the product’s or
asset’s usable life, supply chains are also responsible for coordinating the
recycling, remanufacturing (i.e., the rebuilding of a product to its original
specifications using reused parts), or disposal of the final product.
SWOT A SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) is analysis
is a tool that can support the Borrower Capability assessment, Market
Analysis and Procurement Risk Assessment.
VfM Value for Money.
Works A category of procurement that refers to construction, repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, restoration, maintenance of civil work structure, and related
services such as transportation insurance, installation, commissioning, and
training.
Contents
SECTION I. Introduction ........................................... 1
Purpose ......................................................................... 1
Background ...................................................................... 1
How to Use this Guidance.......................................................... 2
What is Supply Chain Management?................................................. 2
A Simple Illustration of a Supply Chain ............................................... 3
The Importance of Supply Chain Management........................................ 5
Objectives of Supply Chain Management ............................................ 6
SECTION II. Incorporating SCM into the Procurement Process . . . . . . . . . .9
Overview ........................................................................ 9
Supply Chain Analysis ............................................................ 10
Creating Leverage ............................................................... 11
SECTION III. Strategy Development and Procurement Planning ....... 13
Overview ....................................................................... 13
Assessing the Project’s Operational Context, Borrower Capability, and the Project’s
Market Environment .............................................................. 14
The Project’s Operational Context .............................................. 14
Borrower SCM Capability...................................................... 16
The Project’s Market Environment .............................................. 17
Sustainable Public Procurement................................................ 18
Output of the Supply Chain’s Operational Context and Market Environment
Assessment ................................................................. 21
Illustrative Examples .......................................................... 21
Using Supply Positioning/Supplier Preferencing to Inform the SCM Approach............ 25
Mapping the Supply Chain ........................................................ 29
Identifying Supply Chain Vulnerabilities ............................................. 34
Conducting Supply Chain Risk Management......................................... 37
A Supply Chain Risk Management Process ...................................... 37
Capturing the Information in a Risk Management Plan............................. 47
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
vi
Including Supply Chain Considerations in the Works Requirements/Specification......... 49
Chain of Custody ............................................................. 50
Logistics Considerations ...................................................... 52
Incoterms ................................................................... 53
Conclusion ...................................................................... 55
SECTION IV. Supply Chain Considerations in the Evaluation Phase .... 57
Overview ....................................................................... 57
Applying SCM Evaluation Criteria to Support Prequalification or Qualification ............ 58
Applying Rated-Type SCM Evaluation Criteria........................................ 60
Considering Third-Party/Independent Audits ........................................ 61
Preparing the Bid Evaluation Report ................................................ 63
Conclusion ...................................................................... 63
SECTION V. Contract Management ............................... 65
Overview ....................................................................... 65
Recognizing the Role of the Supervising Engineer in Providing Supply Chain Oversight... 66
Including SCM Considerations in the Works Contract Mobilization Plan ................. 66
Managing Supply Chain Risks ..................................................... 67
Managing Supplier Relationships................................................... 69
Conclusion ...................................................................... 72
SECTION VI. Conclusion......................................... 73
ANNEX I. Environmental and Social Requirements .................. 75
National Legislation and International Commitments.................................. 75
The Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework .................................... 76
ANNEX II. A Brief History of Supply Chain Management ............. 79
ANNEX III. Supply Chain Management Functions and Objectives...... 81
Procurement .................................................................... 81
Operations ...................................................................... 81
Logistics ........................................................................ 82
Support Functions................................................................ 82
Information Technology (IT).................................................... 82
Human Resources............................................................ 83
Legal ....................................................................... 83
vii
CONTENTS
ANNEX IV. Skillsets to Build Supply Chain Resilience................ 85
Possessing Analytical Capabilities.................................................. 85
Feeling Empowered .............................................................. 85
Being an Effective Communicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .85
Taking a Big Picture and Identifying Everything the Project Needs...................... 86
Being Creative and Thinking Outside the Box........................................ 87
ANNEX V. SCM and the Bank’s Procurement Principles.............. 89
ANNEX VI. Supply Chain SWOT and PESTLE Analysis ............... 93
Supply Chain SWOT Analysis ...................................................... 93
Supply Chain PESTLE Analysis..................................................... 94
ANNEX VII. Supply Chain Dynamics............................... 97
Endnotes ...................................................... 99
Introduction
Purpose
This Guidance is designed to provide Borrowers with a practical understanding of Supply Chain
Management (SCM). The Guidance introduces SCM practice and describes how SCM relates to each
stage of the procurement lifecycle to best improve supply chain resilience and reduce procurement
risks to support a successful project outcome. The Guidance provides Borrowers with tools and
approaches on “how to” incorporate best practice SCM, including mapping supply chains, identifying
weaknesses, and advising on how best to increase supply chain resilience/security and supply. The
Guidance is cognizant of the increasing complexity of global supply chains, associated vulnerabilities
to shocks and crises, and the ensuing challenges in managing these supply chains.
This Guidance reflects emerging good practice in SCM with a particular focus on infrastructure supply
chains, which is a rapidly evolving space. The Guidance follows the Bank’s Procurement Process,
but equally could be used by Borrowers for projects across their entire portfolio. The application of
the tools and approaches discussed in this Guidance should be proportionate to the risk and value
of the project and cognizant of the resources that the Borrower has available (e.g., for low risk/low
value projects it may be that minimal SCM is needed). When developing SCM specific requirements
or obligations, it is important to understand the specific supply market, consider what the supplier
can realistically control, and set requirements or obligations accordingly.
This Guidance is not intended to cover compliance with other relevant Bank policies (as they may
relate to SCM issues), such as the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). For reference, Annex I
summarizes some relevant parts of the ESF where there are close linkages to SCM.
Background
The Bank’s Procurement Framework, which took effect on July 1, 2016, had a notably positive impact
on many key aspects of procurement performance under Bank-financed investment operations. 1
However, to address the increased global challenges facing Borrowers, a broader understanding of
the supply chain is needed to improve supply chain resilience and manage associated risks to the
successful completion of projects. This Guidance on SCM was thus developed by the World Bank
with Tobias Schoenherr at the Broad College of Business, Michigan State University , to provide
practical tools to assess supply chains in projects for the public sector with a particular focus on
infrastructure.
SECTION
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
How to Use this Guidance
The Bank’s Procurement Regulations define the Procurement Process as:
“The process that starts with the identification of a need and continues through planning,
preparation of specifications/ requirements, budget considerations, selection, contract award,
and contract management. It ends on the last day of the warranty period.”
While the specific process pursued can differ depending on what is purchased, procurement financed
by the Bank generally follows the steps outlined in Figure I. This generic procurement process will be
used in this Guidance to describe the SCM issues that need to be considered at each stage.
This Guidance should be used in conjunction with the Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers
(Procurement Regulations) as well as related Bank publications, including the Project Procurement
Strategy for Development (PPSD) (Short Form Guidance, Long Form Detailed Guidance), Achieving
VfM in Investment Projects Financed by the Bank (Value for Money), Use of Evaluation Criteria for
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services using RFB and RFP (Evaluation Criteria),
Sustainable Procurement, How to undertake a Competitive Dialogue Procurement Process (Competi-
tive Dialogue), Standard Procurement Documents, Contract Management, and the Beginners Guide to
IPF Procurement.
Plan the procurement
Prepare detailed plan for the
procurement process and
schedule activities.
Receive oﬀers
Receive oﬀers. Open oﬀers
and keep a record.
Award contract
Standstill Period, address any
complaints received, award
contract and publish Contract
Award Notice.
Develop strategy
Assess the market and operating
environment and determine procurement
approach (PPSD).
Invite oﬀers
Request oﬀers from the market e.g.
RFS or RFP. Answer questions from
the market.
Evaluate oﬀers
Compare oﬀers and determine most
advantageous bid/proposal.
Manage contract
Finalize Contract Management Plan and
implement monitoring, evaluation and
payment systems. Ensure both parties
meet their obligations.
02
04
06
01
03
05
07
FIGURE I The Bank’s procurement process
What is Supply Chain Management?
SCM refers to the coordination of activities needed to provide a final product or service. These activ-
ities start with the raw materials and end with the delivery of the final product or service to the end
customer. At the end of the product or asset’s usable life, supply chains are also responsible for coor-
dinating the recycling, remanufacturing (i.e., the rebuilding of a product to its original specifications
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
using reused parts), or disposal of the final product. The supply chain captures all Organizations and
activities that are responsible for or can influence this process, including Suppliers/Contractors, logistics
Organizations, and governmental agencies (e.g., customs).
Understanding and managing the supply chain is important for Borrowers procuring goods from Manu-
facturers that rely on input materials from other Suppliers. In other words, the Manufacturer the Borrower
interacts with may in turn rely on several other Suppliers that enable them to manufacture the final
output. SCM is not only important in a manufacturing context. It is, for example, important that the
Borrower awarding a contract to an infrastructure Contractor also understands this full chain of events,
so they can have confidence that supply chain activities are conducted effectively, efficiently, and safely.
This Guidance is therefore not only applicable to the manufacturing context, but also to the infrastructure/
construction context. The Guidance will therefore refer to supply chain Organizations from whom inputs
are needed as “Suppliers/Contractors.”
Since supply chains have become more global and complex, breakdowns at any one point in the chain
have the potential to jeopardize the successful completion of a Borrower’s project and/or present
reputational risks for the Borrower. Supply chain disruptions have illustrated that if just one of the
many Organizations in a supply chain responsible for a project delays the process or delivers poor
quality, the entire project could suffer. Also, if a Borrower’s project creates environmental and social
risks and/or is associated with breaches of requirements, even if they occur at a Supplier/Contractor
not directly contracted by the Borrower, this could impact the Borrower’s/Bank’s reputation. It is thus
not only the final product or service the Borrower should be concerned about, but also how it is made
and how it gets there.
A Simple Illustration of a Supply Chain
Figure II is a simple illustration of what a supply chain for a construction project can look like. The
number of Organizations involved can increase quite quickly as one moves higher up (i.e., from
first-tier to fourth-tier suppliers) in the supply chain. The Supplier/Contractor who has a contract with
the Borrower to provide products or services is called the first-tier Supplier/Main Contractor. The first-
tier Supplier/Main Contractor then contracts with second-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors and so on.
The Borrower does not have a contract with second-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors and beyond, but is
nonetheless reliant on their products or services.
There are of course many more Suppliers/Subcontractors than pictured in Figure II, for instance,
painting Subcontractors. In addition, the Suppliers/Contractors pictured as fourth-tier Organizations
in Figure II may also have complex supply chains themselves. These supply chains, along with logis-
tics service providers and other significant stakeholders such as governmental agencies, are not
represented in Figure II.
To illustrate how the supply chain may span farther back, consider the supply chain of a timber
Supplier, illustrated in Figure III. The timber Supplier may be dependent on processing plants that treat
the timber with different chemical preservatives and processes. These plants rely on sawmills, which
cut the logs into required dimensions. Sawmills, in turn, rely on log yards, which obtain their material
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
Borrower… …
END PRODUCT RAW MATERIALS
Equipment
manufacturer
Sand
supplier
Gravel
supplier
Timber
supplier
Pipe
manufacturer
Shingle
supplier
Insulation
supplier
Vents
supplier
AC
manufacturer
Duct
manufacturer …
Fourth-tier suppliers
Excavating
subcontractor
Concrete
subcontractor
Framing
subcontractor
Plumbing
subcontractor
Rooﬁng
subcontractor
HVAC
subcontractor
Second-tier suppliers First-tier suppliersThird-tier suppliers
Equipment
rental company
General building
supply company
Temporary
labor agency
Pipe
supplier
Rooﬁng supply
company
HVAC supply
distributor
Pump
supplier
Pump
manufacturer Main contractor
FIGURE II A simple supply chain for a construction project
Timber supplier
Wood processing
plant
Wood processing
plant
Log yard
Sawmill
Plantation/
forest
Plantation/
forest
Plantation/
forest
Plantation/
forest
FIGURE III A simple supply chain for a timber supplier
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
from forests or plantations. Please note that Figure III does not identify the logistics providers that
enable the transportation of the timber between the Organizations, or other service providers, such
as agencies that can certify the sustainable harvesting of the timber.
While this illustrative supply chain may seem complex, this has become the reality in most industries.
Over recent decades, Organizations have become much more specialized in their core activities
(i.e., focusing on what they do best), and some have outsourced all remaining tasks to Suppliers/
Contractors (for a brief history of SCM, please see Annex II). These Suppliers/Contractors have often
done the same: focusing on what they do best and relying on other Organizations for the rest. These
developments go hand-in-hand with increasing globalization, making it easier for Organizations to
pursue specialization and outsource tasks globally.
All of this has led to each Organization only contributing a small but valuable part to the supply chain,
which is why managing and coordinating the supply chain has become so important and much more
complex. If just one of the Organizations in the supply chain fails, it can impact the performance of
all Organizations that depend on this input. This can put the successful completion (e.g., on-time and
on-budget) of the Borrower’s project in danger.
When a Borrower engages with a Supplier/Contractor, it is not only the contracted Supplier/Contractor
that needs to be assessed, but also their Suppliers/Subcontractors, and even further up in the supply
chain, if possible. This is what SCM is concerned with: the management, or at least monitoring, of this
dependence on higher-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors.
The longer the supply chain, the greater the risk of disruptions, since higher-tier Suppliers or Sub-
contractors are often more difficult to manage due to the degree of removal from the Borrower. See
Example Box 1 for illustrative impacts of this principle.
EXAMPLE BOX 1: Supply chains: As strong as their weakest link
◾ A large capital project, such as the construction of a health care center or a school, whose
opening may be delayed because critical components are missing.
◾ A medical imaging device that cannot be used because the computer programs required
to read the images are missing, or because trained technicians are not available.
◾ Vaccines that cannot be administered because syringes are missing or unavailable.
The Importance of Supply Chain Management
This greater dependence on suppliers has made SCM more important than ever. Additional pressures
and challenges that have contributed to this include:
◾ Globalization: Organizations often rely on a global supply base. An overseas Supplier/Contractor
may be cheaper, produce better quality, or simply be the only source for the required input or
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
service. However, an overseas Supplier/Contractor may also increase the risk associated with
the required input simply because the physical distance makes it more challenging to control and
monitor the Supplier/Contractor and the associated supply chain. Borrowers should therefore
aim to identify critical inputs and scrutinize the Supplier/Contractor’s supply chain, specifically the
geographic location of higher-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors and any risks that may be associated
with for instance different legal systems in other countries, challenges associated with border
crossings, or reliable infrastructure and transportation. One factor driving globalization, and
enabling it to be better managed is information technology (IT). Coordination and interaction
across multi-country supply chains can be facilitated with IT systems, enhancing visibility and
transparency.
◾ Supply shortages: If a product or component does not arrive when it is needed, this may delay
or even prevent the completion of the entire project. Supply shortages are often the reason
for this delay, which can be triggered by challenges experienced by higher-tier Suppliers/
Contractors or by unexpectedly high demand. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic that started
in 2020 led to many supply shortages. Increasingly longer and more complex supply chains,
coupled with Organizations’ attempts to be “lean” and efficient (i.e., carrying as little inventory
as possible), have been increasing the risk of supply shortages. Borrowers should therefore
assess the Supplier/Contractor’s supply chain to look for choke points that may lead to supply
shortages, as well as the availability of inventory buffers to alleviate any shortages.
◾ Geopolitical events and other disruptions: Dispersed, worldwide supply chains are vulnerable to
disruptions caused by geopolitical tensions and other events. Examples include trade sanctions,
conflict, and the COVID-19 pandemic. Deliberate management of the supply chain is important
to identify, mitigate, and manage such potential vulnerabilities.
Objectives of Supply Chain Management
Considering SCM principles as part of the Procurement Process can help Borrowers assess and
mitigate supply chain related project risks, which is particularly important since challenges related
to the supply chain are not expected to ease in the short term. Overall, SCM can help Borrowers to
achieve the following objectives (for a more general overview of SCM functions and their objectives,
please see Annex III):
◾ Making the supply chain more resilient (e.g., creating a supply chain that can withstand shocks
and disruptions)
◾ Responding to supply chain disruptions (e.g., caused by COVID-19, natural catastrophes, delays
at customs) and market distortions (e.g., a constrained global supply)
◾ Addressing transportation challenges and delays (e.g., posed by more complex logistics arrange-
ments and higher costs)
◾ Managing increased delivery lead times (e.g., due to supply shortages or capacity limitations)
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
◾ Promoting environmental and social sustainability through the supply chain (e.g., by emphasizing
adequate labor standards, including employment terms and conditions, and occupational
health and safety, and the importance of managing environmental impacts)
◾ Monitoring project performance and completion according to specifications (e.g., on-time and
on-budget performance, which can also be determined by the supply chain)
While traditional procurement practices may have solely focused on finding a Supplier/Contractor to
deliver a product or service, the recognition of the real challenges associated with complex supply
chains now makes it important to consider how the Supplier/Contractor’s supply chain intends to
deliver that product or service. 2,3,4,5,6 The skills that may be required to conduct these activities are
summarized in Annex IV.
SECTION
II
Overview
SCM should be considered throughout the Procurement Process, especially when developing the
Procurement Strategy. Supply chain analysis and the development of an effective procurement
approach up front, supported by appropriate due diligence, provide confidence that the necessary
plans and approaches are in place to mitigate risks and take advantage of opportunities in the
supply chain.
Constant supply chain monitoring and management should take place throughout the project, since
no matter how perfect a plan may seem at the beginning, there can always be unforeseen disruptions
and challenges.
Effective SCM therefore relies on a fit-for-purpose Procurement Process that incorporates appropriate
SCM considerations throughout. Application of SCM tools and approaches should be proportional to
the risk/value of the project.
SCM can deliver value at every stage of the Procurement Process (Figure I) because:
◾ Having knowledge about the supply chain’s structure and dynamics is important for develop-
ing a robust procurement strategy and approach. This is where most value from considering
the supply chain can be derived (covered in Section III).
◾ Considering supply chain dynamics is also important when deciding on the evaluation criteria
for Suppliers/Contractors (covered in Section IV).
◾ SCM considerations are also important in the contract management stage. It is rare that every-
thing goes according to plan, especially in complex global supply chains (see the complexities
illustrated in Figures II and III), which is why it is so important to monitor the Supplier/Contractor’s
supply chain performance (covered in Section V).
This Section emphasizes the importance of incorporating SCM considerations into the Procurement
Process, the value of supply chain analysis and due diligence, and the ability of Borrowers to influ-
ence Suppliers/ Contractors’ actions regarding their supply chains.
Incorporating SCM into the
Procurement Process
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
10
Supply Chain Analysis
Supply chain analysis refers to the application of tools to identify opportunities, such as the discovery
of alternate (better) Suppliers/Contractors, the design of more robust supply chains, or the identification
of ways to better manage the supply chain. This Guidance will introduce Borrowers to a range of these
tools, including supply chain mapping. Supply chain analysis also includes supply chain assessment
and due diligence, which refers to processes for identifying, preventing, mitigating,7 or remedying issues
in a supply chain that may lead to disruptions in supply, or any other risks that a supply chain may be
exposed to (e.g., theft or damage during transit, delays at customs, natural disaster, conflict).
Supply chain analysis should be conducted throughout the Procurement Process, as part of strategy
development prior to the identification of potential Suppliers/Contractors, and carried out throughout
the contract until the successful completion of the project. The remainder of this Guidance will intro-
duce Borrowers to a range of effective SCM practices across the Procurement Process, which are
summarized in Figure IV.
Supply chain analysis includes activities such as:
◾ Mapping and monitoring the supply chain
◾ Assessing and prioritizing risks
ᶉ C o n tr a c t M a nag e m e n t ( S e c ti o n  V )
1 . Rec o g n i z i n g  th e ro l e o f t h e su p ervi si n g  en g i n eer i n  p ro v i d i n g  su ppl y
c h ai n  o v ersi g h t
2 . I n c l udi n g  SC M  co n si d erat i o n s i n  t h e Wo rks c o n t rac t  m o b iliz at i o n  p l a n
3 . M an ag i n g  sup p l y  ch ai n  ri sks
4 . M an ag i n g  Su ppl i er rel at i o n shi p s
ᶃᶄ S tr a te g y  Devel o p m e n t and P r o c u r e m e n t P l ann i n g  ( S e c ti o n  III)
1 . A ssessi n g  th e p ro ject’ s  o p erat i o n al  c o n t ext ,  Bo rr o wer c ap ab ilit y,  an d  t h e p ro jec t ’s m ar ket  en v i ro n m en t
2 . U si n g  Su ppl y  P o si t i o n i n g / Su ppl i er P refer enc i n g  t o  i n fo rm  t h e SC M  ap p ro ac h
3 . M ap p i n g  t h e sup p ly  ch ai n
4 . I d ent i fyi n g  sup p l y  ch ai n  v u l n erab i l i t i es
5 . C o nduc t i n g  sup p l y  ch ai n  ri sk m an ag e m ent
6 . I n c l udi n g  suppl y ch ai n  co n si d erat i o n s i n  th e Wo rks req u i reme n t s/ sp ec i ﬁc at i o n
ᶅᶆᶇᶈ S u ppl y  C h a i n  C o n s i d er a tio n s  i n
t h e  Ev a l uati o n  P has e ( S e c ti o n  IV )
1 . A ppl y i n g  SC M eva l u at i o n  cri t eri a t o  sup p o rt
preq u al i ﬁc at i o n  o r qu al i ﬁc at i o n
2 . A ppl y i n g  rat ed-ty p e SC M  ev al uat i o n cri t eri a
3 . C o n si d er i n g  t h i rd-p art y/i ndepend ent au d i t s
4 . P repa ri n g  t h e Bi d  E v al u at i o n  Repo rt
Plan the procurement
Prepare detailed plan for the
procurement process and
schedule activities.
Receive oﬀers
Receive oﬀers. Open oﬀers
and keep a record.
Award contract
Standstill Period, address any
complaints received, award
contract and publish Contract
Award Notice.
Develop strategy
Assess the market and operating
environment and determine procurement
approach (PPSD).
Invite oﬀers
Request oﬀers from the market e.g.
RFS or RFP. Answer questions from
the market.
Evaluate oﬀers
Compare oﬀers and determine most
advantageous bid/proposal.
Manage contract
Finalize Contract Management Plan and
implement monitoring, evaluation and
payment systems. Ensure both parties
meet their obligations.
02
04
06
01
03
05
07
FIGURE IV SCM considerations at key stages in the procurement process
SECTION II: INCORPORATING SCM INTO THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS
11
◾ Responding to identified risks and engaging with Suppliers/Contractors
◾ Supporting transparency and continuous improvement
Creating Leverage
Leverage refers to the Borrower’s power and ability to influence the Supplier/Contractor’s actions and
activities during the business relationship.8 This leverage is not always present. Borrowers can create
leverage during the Procurement Process by conducting supply chain analysis and due diligence at
each stage, and then using that information to set requirements, obligations, and objectives. This can,
for example, be done through specific contract language to address risks identified in the Supplier/
Contractor’s supply chain.
While the Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs) include general provisions (which may
be relevant for SCM) such as requirements on labor and occupational health and safety, the different
Sections of this Guidance will provide further detail on what else may be prudent to be included in
the contract. Establishing this leverage can help to make sure that the engagement continues after
the contract has been awarded (e.g., by having established a strong working relationship or having
set clear expectations).
For the purpose of this Guidance, the seven steps illustrated in the Bank’s Procurement Process can
be grouped into three broad phases (as outlined in Figure IV). Borrowers can develop leverage in
each of these phases in the following ways:
◾ In strategy development and procurement planning, Borrowers can develop a detailed under-
standing of supply chain structures and their associated dynamics. This can help to determine
how a supply market should be approached, enabling Borrowers to indicate to Suppliers/
Contractors their priorities and requirements. This approach can serve as the foundation for
future leverage in the relationship.
◾ The way Suppliers/Contractors are evaluated should be influenced by the information obtained
in the strategy development and procurement planning stage. Leverage at this stage can be
developed, for example, by using appropriate rated-type SCM criteria.
◾ At the contract award stage, leverage can be created by including contract clauses that hold
the Supplier/Contractor accountable for addressing the Borrowers’ supply chain concerns
and priorities. Contract language can also address reporting requirements, and performance
incentives linked to key performance indicators and payment can be included.
◾ In the contract management phase, Borrowers can use the leverage created in the prior stages
to better manage unforeseen events and disruptions. The leverage can, for instance, help
Borrowers better monitor the Suppliers/Contractors’ performance and intervene if necessary.
It is important to be proactive and forward-looking throughout the entire Procurement Process,
and to include appropriate obligations and measures in the contract that facilitate effective
management.
13
SECTION
III
Strategy Development and
Procurement Planning
Overview
Activities conducted as part of strategy development and procurement planning can help Borrowers
develop a better understanding of potential Suppliers/Contractors’ supply chains, including any
inherent risks or potential challenges. This provides an opportunity to address supply chain issues
in the interactions with Suppliers/Contractors as part of the Procurement Process. Specifically, the
following activities can help Borrowers incorporate SCM into their strategy development and pro-
curement planning:
◾ Assessing the project’s operational context, Borrower capability, and the project’s market
environment
◾ Using Supply Positioning/Supplier Preferencing to inform the SCM approach
◾ Mapping the supply chain
◾ Identifying supply chain vulnerabilities
◾ Conducting supply chain risk management
◾ Including supply chain considerations in the Works requirements/specification
While these activities can be conducted in the sequence outlined above, as new information emerges,
it may be worth revisiting previous activities to validate findings.
Related advice for this stage is provided in the Guidance document for Project Procurement Strategy
for Development (PPSD; Short Form Guidance and Long Form Detailed Guidance). Relevant page ref-
erences to the Long Form Detailed Guidance will be provided as appropriate. The PPSD Procurement
Guidance supports the capture of the right information to enable the selection of the best Procurement
Approach, but the tools included also provide an opportunity for Borrowers to think more broadly about
SCM considerations. For example, as illustrated in this Section, when conducting market analysis and
developing the risk management plan, SCM implications may emerge.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
14
Assessing the Project’s Operational Context, Borrower
Capability, and the Project’s Market Environment
A project’s operational context, the Borrower’s capability, and the project’s market environment
are interrelated dimensions of capability and risk. This includes potential environmental and social
impacts of any project that are related to SCM. Assessing these dimensions can therefore provide
Borrowers with valuable insight about how to best approach the management of the project’s supply
chain. This assessment can be conducted in parallel with the development of the PPSD, which also
asks Borrowers to consider the project’s operational context, Borrower capability, and the project’s
market environment (PPSD Procurement Guidance, Section IV).
The Project’s Operational Context
Developing insight about the project’s operational context (e.g., the governance, economic, sustain-
ability, and technological aspects of the industry and/or supply chain in which the project is embedded)
enables Borrowers to gain a better understanding of the industry and its supply chains (the PPSD
Procurement Guidance addresses the operational context on pages 11 and 12). The operational context
may influence the motivation of Bidders/Proposers, the degree of leverage Borrowers have over
Suppliers/Contractors, and the ultimate success of the investment project.
Practical Toolbox A offers a checklist that Borrowers could use to develop a better understanding of a
project’s operational context in which an industry, its Organizations, and its associated supply chains
are operating. Operational context information can be obtained via Internet searches, discussions
with subject matter experts and stakeholders, or analysis undertaken with the Bank or other Organi-
zations, such as the United Nations, which publishes for example global operational context reports
and guidance for collecting contextual country information.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX A: SCM implications of the operational context
The following template provides examples of the kind of information that can help Borrowers
analyze a project’s operational context. Specific operational context considerations include
industry regulations, industry/supply chain transparency, industry pressures, environmental
and social risks and impacts, fraud and corruption, disruption risks, supply chain resilience,
and supply chain complexity/specialization.
This exercise can help Borrowers consider potential actions/remedies that could be deployed.
For example, when there is a lack of industry regulations and supply chain transparency, this can
be addressed with more thorough supply chain analysis and due diligence up-front. To obtain
this insight, Borrowers can for instance request specific information from Suppliers/Contractors
about their own operational context. Areas of concern can also be addressed with specific contract
language.
The PPSD Procurement Guidance offers further advice on related aspects and how they can
be assessed (pages 11 and 12).
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
15
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX A: SCM implications of the operational context
(continued)
TABLE I SCM implications of operational context characteristics
Operational
Context
Potential Sources
of Information Assessment
Context
Characteristics
that Increase the
Importance of SCM
Possible Borrower
Actions/Remedies
Industry
regulations
Laws, standards,
or reporting
requirements
☐  Highly regulated
☐  Somewhat
regulated
☐  Not regulated
Lack of or no strict
industry regulations
that govern the actions
of Organizations
operating in the
sector (for example,
healthcare is highly
regulated, making
SCM easier)
Specify exact
performance
requirements in
contracts, enhanced
monitoring
Industry/
supply chain
transparency
Information
available on
organizational and
industry practices
and performance
☐  Highly transparent
☐  Somewhat
transparent
☐  Not transparent
Only limited
information is
available about the
industry and/or the
Organizations in the
supply chain
Request the Supplier/
Contractor to share
relevant information
(for example, on
production processes,
environmental and
social practices)
Industry
pressures
Industry
competitiveness,
sensitivity to
the economic
environment
☐  Many pressures
☐  Some pressures
☐  No pressures
Significant industry
pressures restrict
the actions of
Organizations in the
supply chain
Closely monitor the
industry (for example,
trends, news articles
on major players in
the industry) to assess
these pressures
and how they may
influence project
outcomes; include
potential obligations
in the contract
Environmental
and social
risks
Likelihood of
project activities
not complying with
environmental and/
or social standards,
laws, regulations,
or lenders’ policy
requirements
☐  High risk
☐  Medium risk
☐  Low risk
Organizations in
the industry are
known or are
likely to represent
a high risk of
environmental and/
or social breaches
of requirements/
obligations
Stipulate appropriate
requirements in
contracts; limit
procurement
to Suppliers/
Contractors that can
demonstrate rigorous
risk management
processes that
reduce these risks
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
16
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX A: SCM implications of the operational context
(continued)
TABLE I SCM implications of operational context characteristics (continued)
Operational
Context
Potential Sources
of Information Assessment
Context
Characteristics
that Increase the
Importance of SCM
Possible Borrower
Actions/Remedies
Fraud and
corruption
The Bank’s
Country Policy
and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA)
☐  High risk
☐  Medium risk
☐  Low risk
Organizations in
the industry are
known or are likely
to represent a high
risk of fraud and
corruption
Emphasize the
Bank’s Anti-
Corruption
Guidelines and
Annex IV of the
Procurement
Regulations (apply to
all IPF operations)
Disruption
risks
Industry disruptions
and challenges
reported in the
past or reports/
case studies into
how the industry
has responded to
disruption
☐  High risk
☐  Medium risk
☐  Low risk
Supply chains in the
industry are prone/
known to disruptions
(e.g., frequent
incidents in the
recent past)
Conduct supply
chain risk analysis
and management;
monitor any risks
that may impact the
supply chain
Supply chain
complexity/
specialization
Number of supply
chain tiers, their
dependency
on each other,
their degree of
specialization,
availability of
alternate Suppliers/
Contractors
☐  High complexity
☐  Medium
complexity
☐  Low complexity
Supply chains in the
industry are complex
(e.g., consisting
of specialized
Organizations)
Map the supply
chain in as much
detail as possible,
including possible
choke points, and
monitor them closely;
include performance
requirements
addressing potential
risks in the contract
Borrower SCM Capability
At this stage it is also prudent for Borrowers to assess their own SCM capability (related content is
provide in the PPSD Procurement Guidance on page 13). The objective is to review the Borrower’s
past performance in managing supply chain risks, including practices and approaches that were
effective in the past, and to leverage this insight in preparing for the current project. Illustrative
factors that can be used to assess a Borrower’s own SCM capabilities, together with associated SCM
implications, are provided in Practical Toolbox B.
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
17
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX B: SCM capability factors
Thinking through the following SCM capability factors and implications can help Borrowers to
identify deficiencies or gaps in their SCM capabilities. These can then be addressed through
targeted capacity building, or by supplementing or supporting the project team.
TABLE II SCM capability factors
SCM Capability Factor Questions for Developing SCM Insight
Previous experience/track record (good
and bad) in implementing similar projects
and SCM issues encountered
What has worked well in the past, and what has not?
What can we learn from these past experiences, and what SCM
resources or insights were missing in retrospect?
How did the approach in which the supply chain was managed
influence performance?
Subject matter/SCM experts and
professional advisors/consultants
Who in our team possesses SCM knowledge that may be useful?
Can we complement our SCM capability with outside
resources?
Analytical capabilities Are advanced analytical capabilities needed to develop
contractual SCM requirements and specifications?
Project planning and implementation Do we have sufficient resources to address SCM issues in
project planning and implementation?
The Project’s Market Environment
When undertaking market research and analysis, as outlined in the PPSD Procurement Guidance
(pages 14–27), Borrowers can also think more broadly about how the project’s market environment
may create opportunities and/or challenges for effective SCM. For example, taking a supply chain
perspective when assessing the project’s market environment can help identify risks inherent to the
supply chain so they can be addressed, mitigated, or managed.
Information for market research and analysis can be found through Internet research, industry asso-
ciations, requests for information sent to Suppliers/Contractors, the experience of others within
the Borrower’s team (for example, the supervising engineers of previous construction projects), and a
Borrower's own knowledge from prior experiences. Practical Toolbox C provides an illustrative
template with which initial supply chain characteristics can be captured as part of the market envi-
ronment assessment. The template also includes an illustrative example that may be found for the
steel industry. Please note that this information is illustrative, may change over time, and may depend
on the Borrower’s location. The information provided in Practical Toolbox C is also illustrative of what
may be obtained by doing a simple Internet search. For more sophisticated analysis, industry associa-
tions and market research firms can be approached that can provide ready-to-use and comprehensive
industry market environment reports.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
18
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX C: Supply chain characteristics identified through
market research and analysis
A simple Internet search for information about the steel industry may reveal the following informa-
tion. Such information may be sought when steel is a major component for a Borrower’s project.
◾ Overall description/characteristics of the supply chain: the supply chain for steel is well estab-
lished, and relies on Suppliers having made significant investment in their plant and capabilities
◾ Potential vulnerabilities or choke points: material shortages, constrained capacity of steel
mills, increasing prices, tariffs, potential lack of domestic supply
◾ Geographical scope of the supply chain: while there may be local production capability,
most steel is produced in China, Japan, India, and the United States
◾ Unique technical capabilities of the supply chain: specialized steel producers offer inte-
grated services (alleviating the need to engage other Suppliers), which can include heat
treatment, testing, and special cutting options
◾ Competitiveness of the supply chain: highly competitive, several large producers
Sustainable Public Procurement
Sustainable public procurement (SPP) is:
“a process whereby public organizations meet their needs for goods, services, works, and util-
ities in a way that achieves value for money on a whole lifecycle basis in terms of generating
benefits not only to the organization, but also to society and the economy, whilst minimizing
damage to the environment.”9
The Bank is developing updated Guidance on Sustainable Procurement that will be available later in 2023.
Given the role that supply chains play in supporting delivery of SPP objectives, SCM becomes
increasingly important the greater the environmental and social risk. Different sectors have different
sustainability risks and opportunities given the nature of competition in the market, the inherent scale
and severity of environmental impact, supply chain complexity, local and national laws and controls,
and availability of standards and evaluation techniques in the sector. For example, the supply chains
of some products or materials may represent higher risk of environmental or social harm.10
In general, the risk of child labor, forced labor, or worker safety issues is heightened if some of the
following characteristics apply to the nature of the workforce:11
◾ Production based on work that is generally low-skilled with an easily replaceable workforce
◾ A sector with a high presence of migrant workers or workers from marginalized communities
◾ Production that possibly involves work in hazardous conditions
◾ Labor contracts arranged through recruiters, agents, or other intermediaries
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
19
◾ Inadequate labor laws and regulations, or lack of enforcement
◾ Presence of cheap labor and a high number of vulnerable workers
◾ Lack of business or government transparency or accountability
A Borrower’s ability to influence Suppliers/Contractors to successfully manage environmental and
social risks will ultimately depend on, amongst other things, the capability of the Supplier/Contractor,
the importance of the project to the Supplier/Contractor, the sphere of control the Supplier/Contractor has,
and the extent to which the Supplier/Contractor can influence their own supply chain.
Borrowers can encourage Suppliers/Contractors to provide information obtained through their
own supply chain assessment and due diligence, gathered, for instance, via supply chain mapping.
Borrowers may have discovered potential risks through these assessments, which they can communi-
cate to Suppliers/Contractors, together with ideas or suggestions on how to address them. Since
supply chains can be so complex with often limited visibility, such information sharing and commu-
nication is important for the effective management of environmental and social sustainability.12,13
For example, if the Borrower identifies potential environmental and social risks in the projects’ supply
chains and determines that systems and verification practices should be put in place, then Suppliers/
Contractors can be requested to describe how these practices would be implemented as part of
their Bid/Proposal. In addition, Suppliers/Contractors could be contractually required to identify key
labor risks including child labor, forced labor, and worker safety risks, not only for themselves, but
also for their Suppliers/Subcontractors. Evidence could also be requested about procedures and
mitigation measures that are in place to address these concerns. One way in which this can be done is
through Bidder declarations, as illustrated in Example Box 2.
EXAMPLE BOX 2: Addressing child labor, forced labor, and worker safety14
The Borrower should address potential risks of child labor, forced labor, and serious worker
safety issues that may arise in the project’s supply chain. What makes the monitoring of
such risks difficult is that most of these are “invisible” to the Borrower because worksites
may be distant and/or the Borrower does not interact with these workers directly.
When the likelihood of child labor, forced labor, or worker safety issues is high, Borrowers
can require the Supplier/Contractor to sign additional Bidder declarations as part of the
bidding process. Among other things, Bidder declarations may request information on
whether the Suppliers/Contractors, or any of their Suppliers/Subcontractors, have been
suspended or terminated for breach of child labor, forced labor, or worker safety obligations
in the past (for example, during the last five years). If a Bidder’s answers to these questions
is affirmative, further information can be requested, including what processes and practices
have been put in place to meet obligations.
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
20
EXAMPLE BOX 2: Addressing child labor, forced labor, and worker safety
(continued)
Appropriate requirements can also be included in the contract. This can include specifying, for
example, that the Supplier/Contractor must include additional declarations in contracts with
their Suppliers/Subcontractors. If child labor, forced labor, or worker safety issues are identified,
the Borrower can require that the Supplier/Contractor take appropriate steps to remedy them.
Borrowers can further request that the Bidder provides information on their Suppliers and
Subcontractors regarding the total number of workers employed, including a breakdown of
the number of workers hired directly and indirectly through labor agencies or Subcontractors.
These actions may help in assessing and addressing labor-related risks.
When a Borrower undertakes National Procurement, Practical Toolbox D offers some considerations
for developing contractual clauses.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX D: Considerations when developing contractual
clauses for construction projects procured under National Procurement
(using the Borrower’s own procurement documents)15,16
Considerations when developing contractual clauses could include the following:
◾ Require the Contractor to identify and mitigate environmental and social risks in its supply
chain, together with the requirement that the Contractor notifies the supervising engineer
immediately if significant issues arise
◾ Require the Contractor to produce an Environmental and Social Supply Chain Due Diligence
Report that identifies the main environmental and social risks in its supply chain, highlighting
the main products and countries involved, as well as steps to be taken to mitigate the risks
in the short, medium, and long term
◾ Require the Contractor to update the Environmental and Social Supply Chain Due Diligence
Report throughout the duration of the contract, including the performance of Subcontractors
on environmental and social issues
◾ Confirm the right of the supervising engineer to assess the Environmental and Social Supply
Chain Due Diligence Report and the annual progress of the Contractor to prevent and
mitigate environmental and social risks in its supply chain
◾ Require the Contractor to provide information to demonstrate its approach in managing
environmental and social risks among Subcontractors; this may include, for example, exam-
ination of labor conditions or labor audits, ongoing supply chain monitoring, updates to
action plans put in place within the supply chain, information about working/employment
practices, evidence of risk management and monitoring processes, or information about
workforce recruitment practices
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
21
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX D: Considerations when developing contractual
clauses for construction projects procured under National Procurement
(using the Borrower’s own procurement documents) (continued)
◾ Confirm the right of the supervising engineer to require the Contractor to submit, agree to,
and deliver an action plan to remedy any identified issues associated with its Subcontractors
◾ Confirm the right of the supervising engineer to gather information about issues regarding
the Contractor and its Subcontractors from third parties, including other customers, trade
unions, researchers, or experts, and to use that information to exercise other rights under
the contract
◾ Confirm the right of the supervising engineer to approve all Subcontractors who carry
out activities within the supply chain of the Contractor’s contract, or any changes to such
Subcontractors
◾ Require the Contractor to collaborate with the supervising engineer to assess risks and
design due diligence processes, and to report regularly on their own due diligence
Note: An Environmental and Social Supply Chain Due Diligence Report includes a Contractor’s
supply chain due diligence policies and practices. The format and length of these reports
vary widely, but they should include policies and approaches to environmental and social risk
assessment and prevention, including measurement, auditing, and control processes.
Output of the Supply Chain’s Operational Context and
Market Environment Assessment
The output of the supply chain’s operational context and market environment assessment can pro-
vide an initial overview and characterization of the key supply chains involved, together with some
preliminary insight into how the supply chains could be managed. This insight can be refined through
additional information obtained in later stages of the Procurement Process (approaches for how to
do so will be described in subsequent Sections of this Guidance, illustrating, for instance, the value
of this information for risk management).
Illustrative Examples
The following are examples of SCM in the context of construction projects for water, sanitation, and
waste management (water treatment plants, sewage systems); transportation (metro systems, rail,
road, public transport); energy and extractives (hydropower, wind power); and health and agriculture.
Specifically, Example Box 3 provides an illustration of the general market and operating environment
for construction projects and associated SCM implications. In addition to these considerations, large
construction projects will need to consider the terms and conditions of the FIDIC Red Book (2017),
as well as the prescribed role of the supervising engineer in managing the main Contractor (large
construction projects using the FIDIC Red Book will have a supervising engineer in place)—this
context is briefly summarized in Example Box 4. Example Box 5 provides a similar illustration for the
agri-food sector.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
22
EXAMPLE BOX 3: The market and operating environment for
construction projects17,18,19,20,21,22,23
Due to the inherent supply chain complexity and the use of multiple Subcontractors,
construction projects are often characterized by high-risk/high-cost contracts. Specifically,
construction projects frequently require Contractors to deliver unique solutions that meet
the Borrower’s specific needs (e.g., necessitating specialized engineering knowledge),
making standardization difficult and increasing the importance of effective coordination
through SCM.
A further contributing factor that makes the management of the construction supply chain
challenging is that it is usually made up of several different supply chains, including:
◾ Materials supply chains, responsible for the provision of inputs (raw) materials needed
for the construction project;
◾ Labor supply chains, responsible for the provision of workers; and
◾ Equipment/goods supply chains, responsible for the provision of earth moving and
other plant or construction equipment.
Integrating so many different Organizations increases complexity. As such, early conver-
sations with Contractors can reveal choke points or bottlenecks typical of certain supply
chains (for instance, shortage of lumber or significant price increases for aluminum), and
thus enable the Borrower to plan accordingly.
Due to the number of Subcontractors, many Contractors have sought to establish relation-
ships with Subcontractors, enabling better control, management, and oversight. Framework
contracts (that is, longer-term agreements that avoid having to negotiate standard terms
and conditions24) and partnering agreements (the adoption of management processes that
facilitate cooperation 25) have also become popular as they encourage the involvement
of select Subcontractors in the project conception and design stages. This can facilitate
greater quality, speedier completion, and lower cost, as recommendations for design changes
from Subcontractors can be considered at an early stage of project design.
Support and knowledge is provided by the Bank’s Global Water Security and Sanitation
Partnership, which focuses in particular on water-related sustainable development goals
(SDGs). The partnership supports client governments to achieve the water-related SDGs
through the generation of innovative global knowledge and the provision of country-level
support.
In addition to these general characteristics of the operational context for construction projects,
the following challenges have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic:
◾ Material shortages and price increases for products such as timber and steel
◾ Significantly increased rates for global container shipments
◾ Labor and skills shortages
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
23
EXAMPLE BOX 3: The market and operating environment for
construction projects (continued)
Implications for Borrowers
Construction project supply chains can be complex, with the main Contractors being respon-
sible for managing the risks of supply chain failures, even if it is the fault of a Subcontractor.
This should be specified in the contract and is a means to transfer the supply chain risk to
the Contractor. In addition, general supply chain practices can be applied, including:
◾ Mapping supply chains to identify critical points of vulnerability
◾ Developing strategies to mitigate/manage identified risks. This could include:
▪ Updating inventory polices and planning for critical materials (for instance, planning
to stockpile certain key materials allows construction projects to be managed with a
lower risk for disruptions), and
▪ Looking at alternative sources of supply, increasing the supply base, onshoring
◾ Monitoring logistics constraints and costs
◾ Engaging Suppliers/Contractors on supply chain issues early
◾ Applying due diligence to Suppliers/Contractors that extends to how they manage their
own supply chains (for example, the financial viability of Subcontractors)
◾ Reporting and frequent information sharing with Suppliers/Contractors to identify issues early
◾ Practicing Supplier Relationship Management to build closer, more effective relation -
ships with key Suppliers/Contractors
EXAMPLE BOX 4: The FIDIC red book (2017) and the role of the
supervising engineer
Large construction contracts financed by the Bank generally use the standard conditions
of the FIDIC (International Federation of Consulting Engineers) Red Book (2017), with some
additions and modifications as appropriate to be consistent with the Bank’s procurement
requirements. The Red Book includes “Conditions of Contract for Construction for Building
and Engineering Works Designed by the Employer.”
Under the FIDIC Red Book (2017), the Borrower [Employer] is required to appoint a super-
vising engineer to administer the contract. The supervising engineer is thus central to the
management of the contract, since they can serve as the Borrower’s agent, supervisor,
and certifier in accordance with the contract. The reason for engaging such a supervising
engineer is that Borrowers are generally not experts in all of the technical, commercial,
and legal considerations of a construction project. The supervising engineer thus acts as
an adviser and consultant to the Borrower. The supervising engineer interacts with a main
Contractor who is responsible for arranging the work with their Subcontractors.
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
24
EXAMPLE BOX 4: The FIDIC red book (2017) and the role of the
supervising engineer (continued)
Aspects related to SCM are included in clause 5.2, which governs the nomination of Sub-
contractors. While the supervising engineer can nominate Subcontractors, if the Contractor
has reasonable objections, the Contractor is under no obligation to use the Subcontractor
(clause 5.2.2). Objections can be based on the Subcontractor’s lack of competence,
resources, or financial strength.
In hiring a supervising engineer, Borrowers should assess how familiar the supervising
engineer is with the supply chains that need to be managed as part of the project. Having
this familiarity may provide the supervising engineer insight into any risks associated with
supply disruptions or possible choke points for such supply chains. This can facilitate closer
monitoring and regular updates to avoid issues.
EXAMPLE BOX 5: The Market and Operating Environment for the
Agri-Food Industry26,27,28
Global events have led to unprecedented stress on the global agricultural supply chain.
Proactively monitoring this supply chain by being aware of its vulnerabilities is therefore of
utmost importance.
The basic agricultural supply chain consists of five major entities (Figure V):
◾ The producers that research, grow, and trade food commodities
◾ The processors that process, manufacture, and market food products
◾ The distributors that market and sell the food (including wholesalers and retailers)
◾ The consumers that buy and consume the food
◾ Governments, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), and regulators that monitor
and regulate the agricultural supply chain
FIGURE V The agri-food supply chain
Governments/NGOs/Regulators
Processors Distributors ConsumersProducers
The operational context and market for the agri-food industry has experienced several
challenges in recent years, including:
◾ Ecological and climate risks to crops: Climate change, rising temperatures, and severe
weather events—including droughts and floods—disrupt harvest patterns and lead to
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
25
EXAMPLE BOX 5: The Market and Operating Environment for the
Agri-Food Industry (continued)
increased price  volatility, creating uncertainty for farmers. Recommended mitigation
measures include:
▪ Localized planning,
▪ Investing in water delivery and irrigation systems and non-traditional water sources,
▪ Improving roads to connect farmers to more markets,
▪ Developing more resistant crops, and
▪ Upgrading crop-storage facilities to prevent spoilage.
◾ Concentration and consolidation in agri-food production, manufacturing, and distribu -
tion: In some agribusiness sectors like meatpacking, a small number of facilities account
for a large share of regional or national food processing capacity. Therefore, even a
temporary shutdown of one or more of these facilities can threaten the food supply.
Example mitigation measures could include promoting competition and local agri-food
businesses, as well as government interventions in case of disruptions.
◾ Labor needs: The agricultural sector is having difficulty attracting workers, attributable to
the often seasonal nature of the jobs, combined with strenuous working conditions. This
issue could be addressed, in part, with government-supported, skills-based apprenticeship
opportunities in local communities and investment in workforce development programs.
◾ Transportation bottlenecks: Delays can be caused by aging infrastructure (e.g., inland
waterways lock closures due to breakdowns), ocean port congestions, shipping container
shortages and costs, and truck driver shortages. Allocating funding to improve and
expand infrastructure can help to remedy these issues.
◾ Trade disruptions: This challenge is exacerbated by the reliance on critical agricultural
inputs sourced from foreign Suppliers, and reliance on only a few foreign market desti-
nations. Recommended mitigation strategies include supporting opportunities for small
exporters, and exploring regulatory changes.
Using Supply Positioning/Supplier Preferencing to Inform the SCM Approach
The application of the tools and approaches introduced in this Guidance should be proportionate to
the risk and value of the project, and cognizant of the resources that the Borrower has available (e.g.,
for low risk/low value projects it may be that minimal SCM is needed). Not every supply chain requires
the same level of supply chain analysis and due diligence. The Supply Positioning Model (Figure VI) is
a useful tool not only for preparing the PPSD and developing the most appropriate sourcing approach
(pages 15 and 16 in the PPSD Procurement Guidance), it can also provide guidance for determining the
level of supply chain analysis and due diligence that is needed. Specifically, it can help Borrowers to:
◾ Determine the appropriate level of analysis, focus, and supply chain due diligence needed for
each contract within the project; and
◾ Estimate how much time and effort Borrowers should consider applying to each supply chain.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
26
High
Cost
Risk or vulnerability
Low
Strategic
Security
Strategic
Critical
Tactical
Acquisition
Tactical
Advantage
Low
FIGURE VI Supply positioning model
Borrowers should focus their effort and resources for carrying out supply chain analysis and due
diligence on their strategic projects (both strategic security and strategic critical), whereas tactical
projects (both tactical acquisition and tactical advantage) likely need only limited supply chain analysis
and due diligence. Practical Toolbox E provides guidance on the level of supply chain analysis and due
diligence that may be appropriate for strategic (strategic security and strategic critical), and tactical
(tactical acquisition and tactical advantage) projects.
This assessment can also provide insight into the relative power of Borrowers and Suppliers/
Contractors, which can inform Borrowers on how to design the Procurement Process to maximize
competition. This assessment can also provide information about the supply base, including whether
capability is concentrated on a few Suppliers/Contractors who, in turn, have larger bargaining power.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX E: Strategic vs. tactical Supply Positioning and
supply chain due diligence
Strategic Projects
◾ Project characteristics: High cost, specialized, and/or strategically important inputs; limited
number of Suppliers/Contractors
◾ Focus: Security of supply
◾ SCM implications: Due to the critical nature of the project, the Borrower should conduct
heightened supply chain analysis and due diligence. This can be in the form of:
▪ Contractual provisions that hold Suppliers/Contractors accountable for supply chain
disruptions, for example, as included in the Bank’s SPDs. Large Works contracts financed
by the Bank generally use the standard conditions of the FIDIC Red Book (2017), with
some additions and modifications as appropriate to be consistent with the Bank’s
procurement requirements.
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
27
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX E: Strategic vs. tactical Supply Positioning and
supply chain due diligence (continued)
▪ Requests to the Supplier/Contractor for detailed supply chain information and vulnera-
bility points/mitigation actions.
▪ Rigorous market analysis and detailed supply chain mapping with the objective to reduce
vulnerability and risk: Borrowers should have a thorough understanding of the market
and the supply chain, including a supply chain map (covered in the next sub-Section),
thus being confident about their SCM decisions; Borrowers should also be confident
that they have adequate information.
▪ Emphasis on developing a collaborative and trusting relationship with the Supplier/
Contractor: This can be achieved by frequent exchange of relevant project information;
listening to the Supplier/Contractor’s questions, suggestions, and concerns; and site visits.
Tactical Projects
◾ Project characteristics: Low-risk inputs; routine purchases; many potential Suppliers/Contractors
◾ Focus: Improving value through leverage tactics; purchasing efficiency
◾ SCM implications: Due to the low-risk nature of the inputs and potential ease of substitutes
and alternate Suppliers/Contractors, limited supply chain analysis and due diligence is
needed; this could be in the form of:
▪ Contractual provisions that hold Suppliers/Contractors accountable for supply chain
disruptions.
▪ High-level market analysis with the objective to reduce any critical vulnerabilities and risk.
▪ Undertaking supply chain mapping if there are known challenges (e.g., supply disruption).
Supply Positioning can be combined with Supplier Preferencing, which enables Borrowers to identify
the likely approach Suppliers/Contractors will take in working with Borrowers based on their position
in the model (see related guidance in the PPSD Procurement Guidance  on pages 26 and 27). In
Supplier Preferencing, Borrowers assess how Suppliers/Contractors likely evaluate them along two
dimensions (Figure VII):
◾ Attractiveness of the account: This dimension captures how attractive the Borrower is to
the Supplier/Contractor, which can be determined based on how easy it is for the Supplier/
Contractor to work with the Borrower. Factors can include the level of information sharing,
collaboration, prompt payment, and low levels of bureaucracy.
◾ Relative value of the account: This dimension not only captures the contract value, but also
the potential for future business the Borrower may provide (i.e., whether the account can be
further developed).
The Borrower’s position in the Supplier Preferencing matrix can determine how cooperative and
open Suppliers/Contractors are, and how likely they are to provide information—which impacts what
a Borrower would then potentially have to do themselves (that is, if Suppliers/Contractors are not
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
28
forthcoming with information). Suppliers/Contractors are expected to be forthcoming with information
if they place the Borrower in the development or the core quadrant, essentially when the Borrower
is attractive. Suppliers/Contractors are not expected to be that forthcoming with information if they
place the Borrower in the nuisance or the exploitable quadrant, meaning the Borrower is unattractive
as a customer. Practical Toolbox F summarizes these implications of Supplier Preferencing on supply
chain information sharing.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX F: Supplier Preferencing and SCM implications
TABLE III Implications of the Supplier Preferencing matrix
Segment Description Responsiveness SCM Implications
High Borrower
attractiveness
(development and
core)
The Supplier/Contractor
pays a lot of attention to
the Borrower; in both the
development and the core
quadrants, the Supplier/
Contractor nurtures the
relationship to retain and/
or grow the account
The Supplier/ Contractor
aims to exceed the
Borrower’s expectations
The Borrower is likely
able to obtain a great
amount of supply chain
information from the
Supplier/Contractor
directly, without having
to resort to outside,
independent research;
the Supplier/Contractor
will be motivated to
manage the supply chain
to meet the needs of the
Borrower
High
Relative value of account
Attractiveness of account
Low
Development Core
Nuisance Exploitable
FIGURE VII  Supplier Preferencing matrix
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
29
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX F: Supplier Preferencing and SCM implications
(continued)
TABLE III Implications of the Supplier Preferencing matrix
Segment Description Responsiveness SCM Implications
Low Borrower
attractiveness
(nuisance and
exploitable)
The Supplier/ Contractor’s
business with the Borrower
is minimal (nuisance), or
high value but unattractive
(exploitable), with the
Supplier/Contractor aiming
to withdraw from the
relationship (nuisance) or to
maximize profits (exploitable)
The Supplier/ Contractor
provides minimal or no
attention to the Borrower
The Supplier/Contractor
may be unresponsive to
the Borrower’s requests for
supply chain information or
only provide very minimal
information; supply chain
analysis and due diligence
by the Borrower should
be high
Mapping the Supply Chain
SCM involves developing a good understanding of the final deliverable (that is, the outcome of the
project) and what it takes to get it accomplished. This can be achieved by developing a supply chain map.
With this information, potential risks can be identified, and mitigation techniques can be implemented.
◾ A supply chain map can increase knowledge about the different inputs that are needed and from
where they are coming. For example, a supply chain map for a construction project would include
all the materials (concrete, timber, gravel, etc.) and where they are sourced from, equipment
(excavators, cranes, shovels, etc.), construction plans (floor plans, building specifications, etc.),
and workers (engineers, builders, electricians, etc.), including where the workforce is sourced from.
◾ This information can help to identify critical inputs that will form the basis for a cost estimate
in the bill of quantities. While specific costs will be determined later as part of the bidding
process, the information collected at this stage can help develop an understanding of the
potential costs and margins at each stage of the supply chain.
◾ Ideally, the supply chain map will trace the supply chain back to the source of the raw materials.
This can help to determine any risks in acquiring these inputs.
Aligned with one of the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles, “fit for purpose,” the effort expended
to develop a supply chain map should be proportionate to the complexity, risk, and value of the
procurement. The approaches discussed earlier in this Guidance, especially the insight obtained
through Supply Positioning and Supplier Preferencing, can help determine the level of effort needed.
Even for a simple construction material input such as gravel, the supply chain can be quite complex,
since it may involve the Contractor procuring the gravel from a building supply Organization, which
is procuring the gravel from a distributor, which in turn is procuring it from a processing facility, which
itself is procuring the raw aggregate from the quarry. The interdependencies of these tiers can be
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
30
captured in a supply chain map as shown in Figure VIII. The failure of just one of these entities could
jeopardize the entire project, which makes mapping and managing the supply chain so important.
FIGURE VIII Illustrative gravel supply chain map and potential risks
Quarry Processing
facility
Building supply
organization Contractor BorrowerDistributor
Downtime of
processing
equipment
E&S concerns,
labor disputes
Supply
shortages
Transportation
delays
Developing a supply chain map enables be tter SCM, since interdependencies can be discovered,
and choke points or bottlenecks (illustrated by lightning bolts in Figure VIII) in the supply chain can
be identified and managed. For example, if gravel is needed in large amounts and the capacity at
processing facilities is currently very constrained, the Contractor could be asked how they would be
managing this potential risk (e.g., by carrying inventory or having secured capacity).
Environmental and social risks can also be identified through supply chain mapping. These concerns
can then be addressed in bidding documents or through negotiations with Suppliers/Contractors. They
can also be dealt with in the contract by, for instance, including appropriate key performance indicators
(KPIs). Example Box 6 provides an illustration of insights gained from mapping the gravel supply chain.
With this knowledge of possible risks, remedies can be identified that prevent disruptions.
EXAMPLE BOX 6: Managing risk in the gravel supply chain
If the processing facility has limited capacity, continuous availability of processed gravel
cannot be guaranteed. The Contractor can address this issue by building an inventory of
gravel, securing in the contract that a certain amount of capacity will always be available,
or by multi-sourcing.
It may also be discovered that there are no quarries in reasonable proximity, such as in
the case of small island nations in the Asia-Pacific, which would mean that aggregate has
to be shipped from far away. The associated logistics expenses, weather risks, and transit
time would need to be considered when planning the project, as well as the environmental
impacts (for instance, in terms of carbon emissions needed to transport the aggregate
thousands of kilometers).
In addition, supply chain mapping may reveal safety violations or Suppliers’ use of child/
forced labor. Particular emphasis should be placed on identifying ways whereby the
Borrower could require gravel suppliers to the Contractors to implement measures to
address these labor issues.
Mapping the supply chain also includes considering how the material moves through the
supply chain. For example, heavy trucks may not be available to transport the gravel from
the building supply Organization to the job site, or the roads to the job site may be in poor
condition so that only lighter trucks can be used. This could increase project cost and time.
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
31
These illustrative examples merely considered the supply of gravel. There are, however, many more
inputs needed for a successful construction project, with their own supply chains and their own risks.
This highlights the importance for the Borrower and the main Contractor to manage these supply chain
interdependencies. Example Box 7 illustrates some of these additional considerations. The extent to which
supply chain mapping is conducted should be proportional to the context, risk, value, and complexity
of the procurement, with Supply Positioning and Supplier Preferencing offering insight in this regard.
EXAMPLE BOX 7: Illustration of interdependencies in the
gravel supply chain
Once the gravel is delivered to the construction site, equipment must be available to move
and compact the material. If this equipment is not owned by the Contractor, it may have its
own supply chain. For instance, the Contractor might rent the compacting equipment from
a national rental Organization, which may need to move the equipment from a distant part
of the country to the regional rental facility.
In addition, there may be many interdependencies between the input materials, necessi -
tating the coordination of their respective supply chains. Insight on how to do so can be
derived from their supply chain maps and potential choke points and risks. For example, if
drainage pipes are required as part of the foundation, and they are not available, the gravel
cannot be poured, and the project may need to be halted.
Practical Toolbox G provides some advice on how to get started with supply chain mapping.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX G: Getting started with supply chain mapping
Step 1: Information gathering
There is a tremendous amount of information that can be obtained relatively easily to help
Borrowers map their supply chains. Information can be gathered through desk research and prior
project reports, and by talking with Suppliers/Contractors and specialists. In construction projects,
the Borrower’s supervising engineer also plays a central role in providing expertise and insight.
Table IV provides an illustrative overview of information sources, how to gather this information,
and some examples.
Various types of information can be gathered that not only provide insight into the basic struc-
ture of a supply chain (that is, how work is divided across the tiers), but also offer valuable
knowledge on some of the following:
◾ The geographic location of Suppliers/Contractors (either within the country or globally),
which may have implications for logistics (if Suppliers/Contractors are farther away) or
applicable laws (if Suppliers/Contractors are located in countries with less stringent labor
or environmental protections)
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
32
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX G: Getting started with supply chain mapping
(continued)
TABLE IV Information gathering
Source How to Gather Information Examples
Desk research This can involve searches on the
Internet, and the review of white
papers, analyst reports, industry
magazines, and resources provided
by professional associations
To get started with mapping the
timber supply chain, the term “timber
supply chain” can be entered into an
Internet search engine; the results
will help familiarize Borrowers with
this supply chain
Prior project reports Reports on prior (related) projects
can be evaluated to identify
challenges encountered; causes
for these challenges could be
mapped to specific supply chain
Organizations or tiers
Borrowers can look back at whether
similar projects had been conducted
in their country or elsewhere in the
Bank’s financing portfolio (using
the Bank’s Projects & Operations
Database), and then solicit the
project reports or even speak with
project managers and supervising
engineers about their experience,
in particular how they managed
the supply chain, what challenges
they may have faced, and how they
addressed these
Specialists/ supervising
engineers
Subject matter experts and technical
specialists can be relied on: they will
likely have a good understanding
of markets and their Suppliers/
Contractors; in construction projects,
the supervising engineer serves in
this role
Those involved in the development of
the project and its specifications could
be relied on for their insight about
the supply chain; similar information
may be obtained from speaking with
industry group representatives
Suppliers/ Contractors/
Consultants
Borrowers can seek information
from (first-tier) Suppliers/Contractors
about their supply chains; this could
include, for example, their own due
diligence practices
Asking questions of Suppliers/
Contractors through early market
engagement: Suppliers/Contractors
can be encouraged to provide this
information by sharing consolidated
data (without revealing confidential
information), which may help Suppliers/
Contractors in their risk management
efforts; having a good relationship with
the Supplier/Contractor will also make
them more willing to share this data
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
33
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX G: Getting started with supply chain mapping
(continued)
◾ The number of Suppliers/Contractors at each tier, which can determine the location in the
Supply Positioning matrix and likely alternatives in case of supply chain failure
◾ The capabilities of each supply chain tier, that is to say, what value each tier provides, which
can also give an indication of how dependent other tiers are on this output
◾ The capacities of each supply chain tier, that is, whether there have been supply shortages
or higher-than-usual demand for certain tiers, which can have implications for Supply
Positioning
◾ The depth of the supply chain, meaning how many tiers there are in a typical supply chain,
which is an indication of the complexity and potential interdependencies of Organizations
Step 2: Determining the level of detail
The amount of time and effort should be proportionate to the risk/value of the project. Ques-
tions that can guide Borrowers to determine the level of information needed are provided
in Table V.
TABLE V Determining the level of detail
Question Consideration
What is the level of influence we
have over higher-tier Suppliers/
Contractors?
Influence generally decreases the farther one moves up the supply
chain, so aiming to control higher-tier Suppliers/Contractors
may not be feasible or practical; Borrowers should aim to collect
detailed information on at least first- and second-tier Suppliers/
Contractors
What are the risks associated with
each supply chain tier?
If there is only limited risk associated with a supply chain tier,
information gathering can be less intensive versus a high risk tier
How important is each supply chain
tier?
If a supply chain tier provides specialized knowledge that is
otherwise not readily available, their importance increases, thus
warranting a greater level of detail; this is exacerbated when only
a small number of suppliers with this specialized knowledge exists
in this tier
How regulated is the supply chain? Supply chains with more intensive regulations, such as the medical
supply chain, require less comprehensive analysis
An indicator that information gathering and analysis can stop is when new information
does not add significant value to the insight or does not seem to likely influence Borrowers’
decision-making.
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
34
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX G: Getting started with supply chain mapping
(continued)
Step 3: Mapping and analyzing the supply chain
With this information, Borrowers should be able to map and identify each key step and depen-
dency in the supply chain. This should facilitate identification of inherent risks, for which mitigation
approaches can be developed. Mapping the various interdependencies should also provide
valuable information for project planning and execution, ensuring that the project stays on budget
and on time.
Step 4: Determining the most effective Procurement Approach
Developing a thorough understanding of the supply chains through their mapping also enables
Borrowers to determine whether there are more appropriate Procurement Approaches that
would create more value. Greater value can be in the form of lower cost, greater quality, faster
delivery, or lower risk.
Identifying Supply Chain Vulnerabilities
Supply chain maps allow Borrowers to identify likely points of vulnerability, that is, key weaknesses
in the supply chain that could jeopardize the project. Knowing these potential supply chain vulnera-
bilities can help Borrowers focus their monitoring on the most vulnerable parts of the supply chain,
develop supply risk mitigation approaches should those vulnerabilities cause a disruption, and/or
address the vulnerability by strengthening that part of the supply chain.
Example Box 8 illustrates how the information obtained through supply chain mapping can help
Borrowers identify vulnerabilities. By thinking about these supply chain characteristics, Borrowers
can develop a better understanding of the dependencies and possible choke points and risks.
Borrowers should note that, in most instances, it is not possible to obtain complete information on all
aspects of the supply chain. However, even limited insights, based on what information is available,
are better than none.
EXAMPLE BOX 8: Identifying supply chain vulnerabilities
Supply chain maps effectively identify points of vulnerability. The following is an overview
of supply chain characteristics that may make the supply chain more or less vulnerable to
disruptions, coupled with illustrative examples.
◾ The number of tiers in a supply chain: The vulnerability of a supply chain increases with
the number of tiers, due to the practical inability to control and obtain insight into such
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
35
EXAMPLE BOX 8: Identifying supply chain vulnerabilities (continued)
complex supply chains. While in most instances it is impossible to obtain a complete
picture of complex supply chains, Borrowers can regularly scan newspapers and other
media that may provide information on disruptions that could potentially impact the
industry and/or the supply chain, for instance, a ship blocking the Suez Canal, COVID-19
lockdowns, trade sanctions, or micro-chip/semiconductor shortages. Advanced technol-
ogies and analytics can also be used to obtain such insights.
◾ The criticality of each supply chain tier: Where a Supplier/Contractor is the only Orga-
nization (i.e., a sole Supplier) or one of the few Organizations that can provide the
input, the vulnerability of the supply chain increases. Vulnerability can be reduced by
respecifying or redesigning the required input (for example, via value engineering or
value analysis) so that more Suppliers/Contractors are able to provide the component,
thereby reducing supply chain vulnerability. The COVID-19 pandemic, for example,
disrupted almost every supply chain, demonstrating to many Organizations the ben-
efits of dual- or multi-sourcing. Vulnerabilities were also discovered in the aftermath
of the 2011 earthquake and subsequent tsunami in Japan, which also highlighted the
risks of single-sourcing. For example, several automotive firms were not able to deliver cars
in a certain paint color (Tuxedo Black and Royal Red), since the sole Supplier of those
color pigments had been impacted by the tsunami. It is important to learn from these
experiences and design the supply chain to reduce risks to avoid further disruptions.
In this case, Organizations started to dual source pigments, and, more broadly,
design their other supply chains with resilience in mind. Toyota, for instance, credits
the lessons learned from the 2011 earthquake to the firm being able to reduce the
impact of the semiconductor shortages in 2021. 29
◾ Supplier/Contractor relationships with their Suppliers/Subcontractors: Strong business
relationships can go a long way to dealing with supply chain vulnerabilities. If a vulnerability
causes disruption for a Supplier/Contractor, a strong relationship can help the Borrower
receive preferential treatment. For example, once the Supplier/Contractor recovers from
the disruption and production resumes, the Borrower may be the first to receive ship-
ments. The semiconductor shortage that started in 2021 was, for instance, addressed
by companies strengthening their Supplier relationships, which can be done via greater
information sharing in the form of the synchronized capacity planning, increasing planning
reliability, and transparency.
◾ Information visibility: Information is power. Vulnerabilities can be better managed and
mitigated with better data. This can be in the form of tracking and tracing shipments,
early warning systems, and frequent status reports. Contracts with Suppliers/Contractors
should set out requirements on what data should be made available and when, and set
out clearly the Borrower’s right to conduct inspections or audits. Commercial software
solutions that provide this visibility are also available.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
36
If a project involves several supply chains, the approach outlined in Practical Toolbox H can be
applied to prioritize supply chain analysis and due diligence.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX H: Prioritizing SCM based on supply
chain vulnerability
Borrowers may determine the relative importance of each supply chain by using the evaluation
matrix in Table VI to assess their vulnerability. The five dimensions set out can be assessed
on a 5-point scale, with these values being totaled for a combined score. The supply chain with
the highest number would appear to be the most vulnerable and therefore the most deserving
of scrutiny using this simple method. Different vulnerability ratings (e.g., high, medium, low) can
also be assigned. In this example, the supply chain for medical equipment is in need of most
immediate attention.
Please note that using a 5-point scale allows Borrowers to make a subjective assessment, as
specifying an actual value—for instance for the number of tiers—may not be possible. Borrowers
should use their best judgment, integrating the information they were able to gather with their
own experience and assessment, to decide on the appropriate score.
TABLE VI Supply chain vulnerability evaluation matrix
Supply Chain
Number
of Tiers
1-Very
Few
5-Many
Average
Tier
Criticality
1-Very Low
5-Very High
Geographic
Location
1-Close
5-Far Away
Supplier
Relationship
1-Excellent
5-Poor
Information
Availability
1-Excellent
5-Poor Sum Vulnerability
Hospital
construction
4 2 1 3 2 12 Medium
Medical
equipment
4 4 3 3 5 19 High
Information
technology
3 2 2 2 2 11 Medium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Vulnerabilities can also be assessed with SWOT (strengths and weaknesses, and opportunities and
threats) and PESTLE (Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, and Environmental) analyses,
which are discussed in the PPSD Procurement Guidance (pages 12 through 14). Borrowers may
expand this assessment to include supply chain considerations. Annex VI provides Guidance on how
to conduct such SWOT and PESTLE analyses within the supply chain context.
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
37
Conducting Supply Chain Risk Management
Globalization, specialization and outsourcing, lean operations, rapid speeds of change, geopolitical
challenges, and increasingly complex supply chains all make risk management a critical element of
SCM. Risks can come in all shapes and sizes, including quality defects, supply shortages, legal issues,
natural disasters, exchange rate fluctuations, port congestions, regulatory compliance, and terrorism.
What makes risk management both challenging and important is that disruptions can occur any time
and at any place in the supply chain.
Identifying and minimizing risk and managing any impacts on the project should the risk occur, are
central aspects of the Procurement Process. Taking an SCM perspective, Borrowers should aim to
expand this view beyond first-tier Suppliers/Contractors, if possible, and identify and assess potential
risks posed by second-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors, if feasible.
While it may be easier for Borrowers to influence the behaviors of Suppliers/Contractors through
direct interaction and contract management, it is much more challenging to do so across their entire
supply chain. Borrowers may wish to bring together key Organizations in their supply chain at regular
intervals to share key messages and discuss learnings.
Borrowers should also consider how they might influence their first-tier Supplier/main Contractor to
cascade behaviors throughout their own supply chains. This can also be done more formally, by, for
example, including in the contract with the first-tier Supplier/main Contractor the requirement that
they need to assess their Suppliers/ Subcontractors (i.e., the Borrower’s second tier) with the same
environmental and social requirements that the Borrower assesses the Supplier/main Contractor
against (for example, terms and conditions of work and safe working practices). This effectively drives
the Borrower’s requirements through the supply chain and is a practice that was applied in the 2012
London Olympics.30
A Supply Chain Risk Management Process
Supply chain risk management can best be viewed as a process that starts with the identification of
all possible risks, followed by their prioritization, their mitigation and management, and their commu-
nication to appropriate stakeholders.
A critical step in risk mitigation and management is for Borrowers to assign responsibility to risk
owners in their team/Project Implementation Unit (PIU), who are then held accountable for monitor-
ing, mitigating, and managing allocated risks. It is important that risk owners (and any other people
responsible for the risk) know what is expected of them and there is no ambiguity regarding the
identified risk, management strategy, and mitigation actions.
Once risks have been mitigated or managed, it is important to learn from these experiences to refine
risk management approaches. The four stages should therefore be treated as a continuous cycle,
with activities reinforcing and informing one another. This circular process view of supply chain risk
management is shown in Figure IX and can be conducted in parallel to the Borrower’s procurement
risk analysis as described in Section V of the PPSD Procurement Guidance.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
38
Step 1: Risk Identification
Risks can be unexpected and varied, which is why there is no definitive list that can capture all possible
choke points and risks. The taxonomy provided in Table VII can provide a starting point for Borrowers
to identify and categorize potential choke points and risks that are most relevant to their project. The
taxonomy uses seven broad risk categories that are further divided into specific risk types.
While there is no “best” template for risk classification, the one presented in Table VII (which was
adapted from a CAPS Research Study)31 can serve as a potential starting point. To illustrate another
risk classification that is possible, please see Example Box 9. These two frameworks can be adapted
by Borrowers to best meet the unique characteristics of their project and its context.
While such taxonomies may seem daunting given the variety of risks included, Borrowers should note
that this is just one framework that can be adapted to suit a project’s needs.
The ability of the Borrower to address these risks depends largely on the Borrower’s level of influence
over its Suppliers/Contractors. It is important for the Borrower to understand their supply market, consider
how important (and attractive) the procurement is to Suppliers/Contractors (using Supplier Preferencing),
as well as the extent to which Suppliers/Contractors can effectively manage the risks identified.
In challenging operating environments, such as those affected by fragility, conflict, and violence ,
Borrowers may consider engaging specialist support that can boost their capacity, and/or request
hands-on expanded implementation support (HEIS) from the Bank.
Where a remedy is not possible, the Borrower should consider identifying alternate Suppliers/
Contractors that can demonstrate that they can meet the relevant requirements.
Step 2: Risk Prioritization
Once risks have been identified, they can be prioritized according to the likelihood that they
will occur and the potential severity of their impact. The likelihood of occurrence assesses how
probable it is that a risk will occur, while the severity of impact assesses how disruptive the risk
Step 1
Risk identiﬁcation
Step 3
Risk mitigation
and managem ent
Step 4
Risk com m unication
and learning
Step 2
Risk prioritization
FIGURE IX A supply chain risk management process
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
39
TABLE VII A taxonomy of risks32
Risk Category Risk Type Description
Supplier/
Contractor
performance
Financial Risk associated with the financial health of the Supplier/Contractor,
which could result in bankruptcy, causing supply interruptions and
other losses
Quality Risk associated with the quality of products and/or services provided
by a Supplier/Contractor
Delivery Risk of the Supplier/Contractor failing to deliver the product/ service
on time
Capacity Risk of the Supplier/Contractor not having sufficient capacity to satisfy
demand
Integrity Risks associated with corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive, or
obstructive practices by the Supplier/Contractor
Reputation Risk associated with negative effects on the brand or reputation
of the Borrower and/or the Bank caused by Supplier/Contractor
practices and/or actions
Environmental
and Social
Social Risk associated with activities in the supply chain such as
engagement of workers, safe working conditions, social impacts on
local communities due to labor influx, engagement with stakeholders,
and impacts associated with use of land.
Environmental Risk associated with activities in the supply chain such as hazardous
waste, pollution, carbon emission, actions that cause conversion or
degradation of natural or critical habitats.
Health and safety Risk associated with Suppliers/Contractors not following relevant
occupational health and safety requirements, including the
handling of hazardous conditions and substances, ineffective
safety training, incomplete records of incidents and accidents,
lack of preparedness to respond to incidents, and lack of
remedies for adverse impacts
Supply market Category Risk associated with a specific supply category, caused, for instance,
by highly complex and fragmented supply chains
Raw material Risk associated with specific raw materials, which can include global
shortages and competition from other industries
Logistics Risk associated with the transportation and storage of products
across the supply chain
Technology Cybersecurity Risk associated with the theft of or damage to the Borrower’s or
Suppliers/Contractors’ hardware, software, or information, including
possible disruption to their operations
Intellectual property Risk involving a potential loss of intellectual property
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
40
Risk Category Risk Type Description
Geopolitical Country Risk arising due to sanctions resulting from UN Security Council
resolutions, which may render the contract with the Supplier/
Contractor ineligible for Bank financing
Labor Risk associated with labor disputes that could disrupt the production
and delivery of products and services
Legal Risk that exposes the Borrower to potential legal actions or disputes
in international trade
Domestic Risk associated with changes in policy in the domestic market of
a Borrower that can affect its ability or costs of sourcing, such as
changes in tariffs, trade restrictions, and trade sanctions
Macroeconomic Currency Risk associated with currency volatility that might negatively affect an
Organization’s profitability (sometimes also termed foreign exchange risk)
Inflation/volatility Risk associated with inflationary pressure or swift changes in the
price of raw materials and labor in source countries
Natural disasters Risk associated with disruptions affecting the operation of
Suppliers/Contractors or the flow of products, due to major natural
catastrophes such as earthquakes, tsunamis, tornados, hurricanes,
fires, and floods
TABLE VII A taxonomy of risks (continued)
EXAMPLE BOX 9: An illustrative risk classification33
The risk classification in Table VIII is based on the eight key areas suggested for struc-
turing risks in the PPSD Procurement Guidance . To illustrate what these risks can look
like in the construction industry, examples from within this context are provided. These
are industry-level risks, which can be complemented by risks for specific projects that
are being considered.
TABLE VIII Construction industry risk classification across eight categories
Risk area Illustrative Risks
Market complexity and
competitiveness
Fragmented industry (many competing Organizations without any
Organization dominating the industry); more volatile than other industries;
for routine construction, low barriers to entry, allowing small Organizations
to compete for smaller Works (limited economies of scale); more complex
construction projects, such as hydro-power, bridges, rail and metros are
more consolidated with fewer Organizations able to compete (costs of
bidding are high)
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
41
EXAMPLE BOX 9: An illustrative risk classification (continued)
Risk area Illustrative Risks
Delivery and supply
security
Frequent customer complaints due to over-budget and over-time
performance; lengthy claim processes
Suppliers and Supplier
relationships
Many insolvencies; preference is often given to the lowest-price bidder,
making competition based on quality and reliability challenging; digital
technologies can enable better collaboration
Main Contractor Main Contractor’s lack of deep expertise in the specific type of project, with
no alternate main Contractors with better expertise available
Cost trends Continuous cost pressure; increased emphasis on total cost of ownership
Technical innovation and
the rate of change
Lower degree of digitalization compared to most other industries; trends
toward modularization, off-site production automation, and on-site
assembly automation; lighter-weight materials—such as light-gauge steel
frames and cross-laminated timber—can enable simpler factory production
of modules
Sustainability
(environmental,
economic, social)
Large share of informal labor; reliance on temporary labor and
Subcontractors; higher risk of forced/exploited labor; lack of environmental
obligations in some regions where raw materials are sourced, low attention
to occupational health and safety
Business and operating
environment
Slow industry growth; risk aversion (stifling innovation); low profitability;
high level of economic uncertainty; cyclical demand; unique requirements
limiting standardization; logistics challenges due to weight and complexity
of parts; lack of skilled labor; heavily regulated in most countries; projects
involve many steps with scattered accountability, complicating coordination;
risks are often passed to other parts of the supply chain instead of being
addressed; Organizations make money from claims rather than from good
delivery
TABLE VIII Construction industry risk classification across eight categories (continued)
will be if it materializes. This assessment is inherently subjective, but Borrowers can use their
prior experience as well as the information gathered as part of the Procurement Process to
inform their analysis.
Prioritization can be done using a scale like the one below, which uses five scoring categories:
1 = Very Low (VL)
2 = Low (L)
3 = Medium (M)
4 = High (H)
5 = Very High (VH)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
42
Based on the likelihood of occurrence and severity of impact classifications, Borrowers can plot
each risk on a risk criticality matrix (see also page 30 of the PPSD Procurement Guidance). With this
approach, risks can be classified into four main groupings (Figure X). This matrix is also sometimes
called a heat map, with the red area indicating a high overall risk score and the blue area a low overall
risk score. An example of risk prioritization within the context of the construction industry is provided
in Example Box 10, and some further illustrative questions to assess risks in construction supply
chains are provided in Practical Toolbox I.
FIGURE X Assessing risk on a heat map
Overall Risk Score
High
Substantial
Moderate
Low
VH
VL
Impact
Likelihood
EXAMPLE BOX 10: Illustrative risk prioritization
Since every construction project is different and a risk prioritization exercise is inher-
ently subjective, the following example is provided to demonstrate the mechanics of the
approach. Let us consider three risks, which a Borrower’s supervising engineer may assess
as follows:
① Risk of poor labor conditions
◾ Likelihood: Country specific information indicates that there are a lot of migrant
workers engaged through labor intermediaries, thus rendering the likelihood of this
risk occurring as Very High.
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
43
EXAMPLE BOX 10: Illustrative risk prioritization (continued)
◾ Impact: If it is found that migrant workers don’t have the same terms and conditions
as regular employees, and/or circumstances of forced labor may have occurred as
part of the construction project, this could have significant legal and reputational
consequences for the Borrower, the supervising engineer, and the Bank; therefore,
the impact is assessed to be Very High.
② Risk of cost overruns
◾ Likelihood: The industry is known for cost overruns (since Contractors are typically
selected based on price), with the Borrower’s supervising engineer potentially having
had experience with similar prior projects; however, the Borrower’s supervising
engineer intends to closely monitor costs incurred by the Contractor, leading the
Borrower’ supervising engineer to assess the likelihood as Medium.
◾ Impact: Since only a limited amount of funding is available, should the project
be significantly over budget, the consequences will be substantial, leading the
Borrower’s supervising engineer to assess the impact as High.
③ Risk of poor quality
◾ Likelihood: Since the industry is fragmented and many different Subcontractors
may be working on the project, the likelihood of poor quality is assessed by the
Borrower’s supervising engineer as Medium.
◾ Impact: The Borrower’s supervising engineer can think back to what quality problems
were incurred in prior projects, and what impact they had (e.g., how easily they
were corrected); based on this assessment, the Borrower’s supervising engineer
assesses the impact as Low.
Based on this assessment, the three risks can be plotted in the risk management analysis
matrix as shown in Figure XI. Per the matrix, the risk of poor labor conditions (① ) was
classified as highest, with cost overruns (② ) representing a substantial risk, and quality
problems (③) a moderate risk. This understanding can help in assigning priority levels for
each risk, with risk of poor labor conditions having highest priority, cost overruns having
a medium priority, and poor quality a low priority. Plotting risks on the matrix is especially
valuable when more risks are considered, since the most critical ones (those in the red field)
can be easily identified.
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
44
EXAMPLE BOX 10: Illustrative risk prioritization (continued)
FIGURE XI Mapping risks on the risk management analysis matrix
VH
VL
Impact
Likelihood
3 2
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX I: Illustrative questions to assess risks in
construction supply chains34
These questions were framed within the context of a construction project, also considering
that raw materials or workers may be sourced from overseas. The questions can be adapted to
other project contexts. In addition, while these questions are included here in the sub-Section
on Supply Chain Risk Management, they can also be asked during the market and operating
environment assessment as part of the PPSD Procurement Guidance, reinforcing that the
activities outlined in this Section should not be treated as a linear process, but as activities
that can be done in parallel.
◾ Are there qualified engineers that could supervise the project? Do these supervising
engineers have insight into the specific supply chains needed to deliver the project?
◾ Are raw materials readily available domestically, or will they need to be transported from
overseas?
◾ What is the state of the transportation infrastructure? Can raw materials/equipment be
easily and safely transported to the project location?
◾ What regulations (e.g., building regulations) and/or standards must be adhered to?
◾ Are there sufficient local workers to undertake the project, or are there skills shortages in
certain areas?
(continues)
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
45
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX I: Illustrative questions to assess risks in
construction supply chains (continued)
◾ Do Suppliers/Contractors have local knowledge, taking into consideration issues like ways
of working, codes of conduct, health and safety, business practices, or other aspects that
they may be unfamiliar with?
◾ Are stakeholders familiar with any technology being proposed by Suppliers/Contractors,
or will specialists be required (for instance, to operate sophisticated medical equipment)?
◾ Are there cultural and/or language barriers to consider that may negatively impact the
supply chain or the project itself?
◾ Are there tools in place or proposed to foster better relationships and communication?
◾ Is there a contingency plan for dealing with unexpected or planned issues? Is this plan
reviewed and updated regularly?
◾ What impact would a failure of higher-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors have on the project?
Who could replace them, and on short notice?
Step 3: Risk Mitigation and Management
Borrowers can use the positioning of the risk on the heat map to determine whether and how these
risks should be addressed. Typical actions for each of the four categories include:
◾ High overall risk score: These are the most pressing risks that Borrowers should address through
ongoing risk assessments and the development of contingency plans (for instance through the iden-
tification of alternate sources, higher inventory levels, Supplier/Contractor inspections, and audits).
◾ Substantial overall risk score: These are important risks to be addressed. Actions include
periodic risk assessments, ongoing monitoring, and the development of contingency plans.
◾ Moderate overall risk score: These risks should be managed via routine procedures where
possible. The use of internal reporting mechanisms is a common approach, and Borrowers
may decide to accept these low-priority risks.
◾ Low overall risk score: These are the least critical risks, which can be accepted as being part
of doing business, or monitored and assessed on an as-needed basis.
Similar to the procurement risk management process as part of the PPSD Procurement Guidance ,
the outcome of the supply chain risk management process can lead to four main types of strategies:
◾ Avoid: The current supply chain design being considered is not pursued since it introduces risks
that are too severe. For example, when the risk of forced labor is high, an alternate supply chain
design can be identified with Suppliers/Contractors that have stringent workforce protection
policies.
◾ Minimize: The supply chain design is implemented, but the Borrower seeks to mitigate associated
risks via improved monitoring or the modification of processes and procedures. For example, the
Borrower requires reporting and/or conducts inspections or audits on a regular basis.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
46
◾ Spread or transfer: The supply chain design is implemented, but risk is reduced via diversi-
fication, subcontracting, outsourcing, joint ventures, hedging, or insurance. For example, the
Borrower may want to purchase scarce components themselves, and then provide them to the
Supplier/Contractor when needed (giving the Borrower more control, but also greater liability
if they fail to deliver on quality issues).
◾ Accept: The supply chain design is implemented, and any risks associated with it are accepted.
For example, the effort needed to prevent every small quality defect would outweigh the
impact of the defect; hence Borrowers accept this risk, since the defect can be corrected easily
and inexpensively without any harm to stakeholders.
How risk mitigation and management can look like for the three identified risks from Example Box 10 is
illustrated in Example Box 11.
EXAMPLE BOX 11: Illustrative risk mitigation and management
Risk mitigation and ma nagement approaches for the three identified risks from Example
Box 10 may include the following:
① Risk of poor worker conditions
◾ Minimize: Insert contract language on good working conditions and/or bidder
declarations for forced labor not only for the Contractor, but also for all Sub-
contractors; reporting, formal visits, and unannounced site visits to the Contractor
and its Subcontractors
◾ Avoid: If the Borrower finds that they are unable to require Suppliers to address forced
labor issues in the supply chain due to lack of control and influence, the Borrower
should consider looking for alternate Suppliers/Contractors that are able to do so
② Risk of cost overruns
◾ Minimize: Insert contract language that is very specific as to when cost increases are
allowed; require sign-off by the Borrower for any cost increase requested
③ Risk of poor quality
◾ Minimize: Insert contract language specifying criteria for good quality work; inspec-
tions by the Borrower, the supervising engineer, and/or technical specialists on-site
to monitor quality
Step 4: Risk Communication and Learning
It is important to learn from past successes and failures, which is what makes risk communication and
learning a critical step in the supply chain risk management process.
Practical Toolbox J provides a template for recording this information. This can be shared with others
managing similar projects, allowing risk management approaches to be refined, and increasing the
risk management expertise of the Borrower.
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
47
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX J: A template for recording risk experiences
A large part of supply chain risk management relies on Borrowers’ experiences of prior events
and how they were managed. Table IX provides a template with which this information can
be captured. It is important to record both risks that occurred (even if they were not managed
well) and near-misses (i.e., when an impending risk did not materialize or it was prevented).
TABLE IX Post-hoc risk assessment
Name of the risk event:
Date and duration of the risk:
Description of the event (including impact and severity):
Description of actions undertaken once the risk was
identified:
Description of potential or actual causes:
Risk owner (who was responsible):
What went well?
What improvements are possible?
Capturing the Information in a Risk Management Plan
Borrowers can capture the insight developed as part of the supply chain risk management process,
which relies on bringing earlier analysis together, into a risk management plan, which is very similar
to the one presented in the PPSD Procurement Guidance. This offers a transparent way to review and
compare all identified risks, prioritize them, and develop action plans if warranted.
The example in Practical Toolbox K offers an illustration on how such a risk management plan can
be populated. There is no right or wrong way in doing so, the important part is that it is done.
The template enables a structured way to think about potential risks, classify them, and determine
possible mitigation strategies. Based on the subjective assessment below, the first risk identified
(quality problems at a second-tier Supplier) would be the most critical risk to address.
(continues)
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX K: A supply chain risk management plan
The risks identified in the first stage of the supply chain risk management process (risk identi-
fication) are listed in the first column (risk description). The second stage (risk prioritization)
can identify the potential disruption, its likelihood of occurrence, and its severity of impact. The
likelihood of occurrence and the severity of impact are assessed on a five-point scale (with
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
48
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX K: A supply chain risk management plan (continued)
higher numbers indicating greater likelihood of occurrence and severity of impact). The overall risk score
is determined by multiplying these numbers. Higher numbers can flag risks that are more critical to
address. The third stage (risk mitigation and management) can help develop mitigation strategies, iden-
tify the risk owner, and outline in which stage of the Procurement Process this risk should be addressed.
TABLE X A supply chain risk management plan
Risk
Description
Potential
Disruption
A B Overall
Risk
Score
(A 3 B)
Mitigation
Strategies
Risk
Owner
Procurement
Process
Stage
Likelihood
of
Occurrence
Severity
of
Impact
Quality
problems at
a second-
tier Supplier
Rework,
delays,
propagation
of poor
quality
3 5 15 (1)  Inspections/
audits
(2)  Frequent
requests
for status
updates by
the first-tier
Supplier
A.B. (1)  Evaluate offers
(2)  Award and
manage the
contract
Delays at
customs
Delays,
project must
be put on hold
2 4  8 (1)  Supply
chain
mapping and
identification
of logistical
roadblocks
(2)  Ensuring
that shipping
documents
are complete
(3)  Consolidate
local supply
T.S. (1)  Procurement
planning
(2)  Award and
manage the
contract
Labor
Issues
Environmental
and social
concerns,
need to find
new Supplier
2 5 10 (1)  Site visits
prior and
after Supplier
selection
(2)  Codes of
conduct
(3)  Clear
obligations
in contracts
T.B. (1)  Procurement
planning
and contract
management
(2)  Invite offers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
49
Supply chain risk management is one of the most important SCM activities in the strategy develop-
ment and procurement planning stage, since it directly informs the formulation of the contract and
the Procurement Approach. Practical Toolbox L includes a set of questions that Borrowers can ask
themselves to determine how risks can be addressed in the next phases of the Procurement Process.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX L: Risk checklist at the procurement planning stage35
The checklist can help Borrowers to determine how risks can be addressed in the next phases
of the Procurement Process. This checklist should be adapted to the Borrower’s unique project
and context.
TABLE XI Procurement planning risk checklist
Internal Company Policies of Bidders/Proposers Yes / No Comments
Have all relevant risks been identified? ☐ Yes ☐ No
Can these risks be managed or mitigated? ☐ Yes ☐ No
Are these risks likely to be clear to Bidders/Proposers? ☐ Yes ☐ No
Can the award criteria take account of these risks? ☐ Yes ☐ No
What evidence will Bidders/Proposers be asked to provide? ☐ Yes ☐ No
Is the evidence required proportionate to the risks? ☐ Yes ☐ No
Can the terms and conditions of the contract address these risks? ☐ Yes ☐ No
Do the terms and conditions pass unnecessary risks to the
Supplier/Contractor?
☐ Yes ☐ No
Including Supply Chain Considerations in the
Works Requirements/Specification
The Bank’s SPDs include general provisions related to SCM. While the Bank does not allow a Borrower
to adjust standard contract terms in SPDs, additional supply chain considerations can be addressed
in the Works requirements/specification. Including such SCM considerations can be a critical element
that influences the success of the relationship between the parties and how future SCM challenges
are managed. Borrowers should therefore consider the Project Development Objectives and the
VfM principles when drafting the Works requirements/specification (and the final contract), and design
them with a “fit for purpose” mindset, that is to say, one that is proportionate to the complexity, risk,
and value of the procurement.
Where appropriate, Borrowers should include in the Works requirements/specification additional
SCM expectations for Suppliers/Contractors, which can spell out further SCM requirements that
go above and beyond the SCM requirements in the SPDs. The extent to which Procurement
Documents include SCM Works requirements/specification depends on the type and structure of
the project.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
50
For construction contracts, which are governed by the FIDIC Red Book (2017), the Borrower can
also nominate specialist Subcontractors and Suppliers as and when they are required, which is a
consideration that should be thought about at this stage. Once the Contractor has accepted the
nomination, they become responsible for the actions of the Subcontractor.36 Contract conditions on
these matters are also included in the Bank’s SPDs, including General Conditions, Particular Condi-
tions, and Contract Forms.
If the Borrower intends to set clear SCM expectations for Supplier/Contractor behavior and perfor-
mance in the contract (e.g., ethical behavior, monitoring of Subcontractors, performance incentives,
KPIs), then ambiguous wording should be avoided, leaving no room for interpretation by Suppliers/
Contractors. The SCM Works requirements/specification should be informed by the output of the
PPSD Procurement Guidance and procurement planning to mitigate identified risks and support the
successful achievement of project objectives. Example Box 12 provides an illustration of aspects that
Borrowers may want to include in the Works requirements/specification.
EXAMPLE BOX 12: Illustrative SCM considerations that can be included
in works requirements/specification
The steps undertaken as part of strategy development and procurement planning can
provide valuable insight into what Borrowers may want to include in Works requirements/
specification to protect against disruptions and risks. This could include, amongst other
things:
◾ Reporting requirements (e.g., labor issues, environmental claims)
◾ Commitments to holding a certain level of buffer (safety) inventory
◾ Commitment of the Supplier/Contractor to have back-up supply sources in place
◾ Job/skills creation targets (e.g., training, number of apprenticeships created)
◾ Commitments to using small, local businesses in the supply chain
Since material/product supply chains can be very long and complex, Works requirements/specification
may also include considerations relating to the chain of custody, logistics, and Incoterms® [note: these
matters are fully addressed when a Borrower uses the Bank’s SPDs, but may not be included in a
Borrower’s own documents when National Procurement is undertaken].
Chain of Custody
The Chain of Custody (CoC) concept within SCM refers to a system that provides assurance of supply
security and traceability of a given material or product. This is achieved by acquiring information
about how the materials or products are transferred, monitored, and controlled throughout the entire
supply chain or significant parts of it. Establishing a CoC can enable materials or products to be
traced from their point of origin. A related concept is Supply Chain Traceability, which is the ability to
identify, track, and trace elements of a product or substance as it moves along the supply chain from
raw materials to finished products.
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
51
A CoC audit generally involves verifying that procedures and policies are implemented throughout the
supply chain, which includes staff training, the use of compliance documents, and the adherence to
international and local regulations/standards. It can start with a desktop review, followed by on-site audits
of Suppliers/Contractors and continuous monitoring. It may involve acquiring documentation such as a
mine origin certificate, transport documentation, export and import records, and factory receipts.
The CoC concept has been applied extensively within the paper, pulp, and wood products industries
for many decades, enabling Borrowers to have increased confidence that independently certified
products are sourced from sustainably managed forests.
A CoC in the wood products supply chain, for instance, starts with the forest where the trees are
harvested (the sustainable management of these forests can also be independently certified). The
aim of the CoC certification is to ensure that sustainably grown and harvested wood is not mixed with
non-compliant wood in the supply chain from the sawmill to the processor. The final product receives
a certificate with which consumers can have increased confidence about the origin of the product.
The CoC of a product provides Borrowers with a potentially complete supply chain map. However, in
the short/medium term, establishing such full transparency is challenging. Borrowers should therefore
work to establish visibility and accountability as much as possible, and proportionate to the complexity,
risk, and value of the procurement.
Conducting a CoC assessment of a product is generally outside the scope of a Borrower’s exper-
tise, which is why specialized CoC firms can be hired for this purpose. When completing the PPSD,
Borrowers should consider whether the engagement of such a firm would be worth the investment.
In some countries it may be required by law for certain high-risk commodities.
The International Standards Organization (ISO) also developed general terminology and models for
establishing a CoC (ISO 22095:2020), providing clear definitions of the different CoC models and the
corresponding requirements. Example Box 13 summarizes this standard.
EXAMPLE BOX 13: ISO’S 22095:2000 CoC standard37
The International Standards Organization (ISO) developed general terminology and models
for establishing a CoC ( ISO 22095:2020), providing unambiguous definitions of different
CoC models and the corresponding requirements, which are independent of sectors, mate-
rials, products, and issues addressed. Specifically, the standard defines a CoC framework
as providing:
◾ A consistent, generic approach to CoC design, implementation, and management
◾ Harmonized terminology
◾ General requirements for different CoC models
◾ General guidance on the application of the defined CoC models, including initial guid-
ance on the circumstances under which each CoC model might be appropriate
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
52
EXAMPLE BOX 13: ISO’S 22095:2000 CoC standard (continued)
Suppliers/Contractors can get certified against the standard, which is done by independent
certification bodies. A valid certification indicates the conformity of the Supplier/Contractor
to the standard. As such, the standard can enhance the transparency of specific claims
regarding materials or products and thereby support the reliability of these claims. How-
ever, it is not intended to be used on its own to make or verify such claims.
Borrowers can request Suppliers/Contractors to be ISO 22095:2000 certified as a
pre qualifying criterion. However, this is a relatively new certification, which means that
Suppliers/Contractors in developing and emerging countries may not yet have had the
resources to invest in obtaining this certification. Suppliers/Contractors can, however,
be asked to provide a traceability protocol, describing the insight that they have into their
supply chain.
Logistics Considerations
Logistics is the practice of planning the movement of goods from origin to destination. Logistics
matters have become much more critical, complex, and hence more costly due to the COVID-19
pandemic and spiraling energy prices. Global logistical challenges include constrained capacity
(such as container shortages), shipping rate increases, fuel surcharges, geopolitical issues such
as trade tensions, and cybersecurity attacks. Considering logistics aspects is therefore a critical
element of successful SCM. Practical Toolbox M provides illustrative strategies of how logistics
risks can be mitigated.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX M: Logistics risk mitigation strategies38
Contractual Obligations
◾ Extend shipping pricing agreements beyond six months to lock-in current pricing (a form
of hedging)
◾ Implement index-based price adjustments
◾ Make sure Suppliers have robust contingency plans to respond to logistical disruptions
Other Mitigation Options
◾ Work closely with core partners to mitigate cost increases
◾ Secure capacity where necessary
◾ Prioritize cargo and establish charters to protect service
◾ Identify alternate shipping routes, modes, and carriers
◾ Hedge fuel prices by forward purchasing
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
53
Logistics considerations also include determining when and where the responsibility for managing
the shipment of goods transfers from one Organization to the other. This can be addressed with the
specification of Incoterms. The desired Incoterm should be clearly specified in the contract, and Borrowers
should check that Suppliers/Contractors do the same with their own Suppliers/Subcontractors.
Incoterms®
Incoterms are a set of widely used terms of sale that set out internationally recognized rules which
define the responsibilities of sellers and buyers. This includes specifying who is responsible for paying
for and managing the shipment, insurance, documentation, customs clearance, and other logistical
activities. It is therefore important that Borrowers fully understand the implications of the Incoterm that
is used and what that means, and who is accountable (and ultimately liable) for each logistics activity.
In determining the appropriate Incoterm, Borrowers can ask themselves the following questions:
◾ From what stage onward do I want to manage the logistics, and what stages do I want the
Supplier/Contractor to manage?
◾ What risks are associated with the management of the logistics I am responsible for, and which
risks are carried by the Supplier/Contractor?
◾ Which charges am I responsible for as part of the logistics journey, and what is the Supplier/
Contractor responsible for?
It is important to understand that the Incoterms by themselves are not a contract, and they also do not
cover issues such as tariffs, force majeure, intellectual property rights, or remedies sought for a breach
of contract. Incoterms also do not address the transfer of property, title, or ownership of the goods sold.
Incoterms are divided into Rules for any Mode or Modes of Transport (EXW, FCA, CPT, CIP, DAP, DUP,
DDP), and Rules for Sea and Inland Waterway Transport (FAS, FOC, CFR, CIF). The four maritime Inco-
terms are intended for when the Supplier/Contractor places the goods on board (or in FAS, alongside)
a vessel at a sea or river port, which is also when the risk of loss or damage to the goods is transferred
to the Borrower. The seven multi-modal Incoterms are intended for when the Supplier/Contractor or
carrier hands the goods to the Borrower at a place that is not on board (or in FAS, alongside) a vessel.
Table XII lists the eleven Incoterms, their meanings, and the place at which the risk transfers from the
Supplier to the Borrower. Table XIII provides an overview of how the obligations and charges along
the shipment’s journey are divided between Suppliers/Contractors and Borrowers. Table XIII is not
intended to be used alone, and should always be used in conjunction of the Incoterms 2020 rule
book (ISBN: 978-92-842-0510-3).
Borrowers that want to apply the Incoterms to their contract should make sure that this is made clear
in the contract.
For example, “CIP Nairobi Incoterms, 2020” means that the Supplier/Contractor is responsible for
the carriage (shipment and insurance) of the goods to Nairobi, with the risk and responsibility then
transferring to the Borrower once the goods are delivered to the carrier. In case of an international
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
54
TABLE XII Incoterms abbreviations, meaning, and place of risk transfer
Abbreviation Meaning Place of Risk Transfer
EXW Ex Works At Borrower’s disposal
FCA Free Carrier On Borrower’s transport
FAS Free Alongside Ship Alongside ship
FOB Free On Board On board vessel
CFR Cost and Freight On board vessel
CIF Cost, Insurance & Freight On board vessel
CPT Carriage Paid To At carrier
CIP Carriage & Insurance Paid to At carrier
DAP Delivery At Place At named place
DPU Delivered at Place Unloaded At named place unloaded
DDP Delivered Duty Paid At named place
TABLE XIII Incoterm obligations and charges along the shipment’s journey
EXW FCA FAS FOB CFR CIF CPT CIP DAP DPU DDP
Export packaging
Loading chargers
Delivery to port/place
Export duty, taxes, customs clearance
Origin terminal charges
Loading on carriage
Carriage charges
Insurance
Destination terminal charges
Delivery to destination
Unloading at destination
Import duty, taxes, customs clearance
Notes: This table is for illustrative purposes only and is not intended to be used alone; it should always be used in conjunction with the Incoterms
2020 rule book.
Supplier responsibility
Borrower responsibility
Negotiable
SECTION III: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCUREMENT PLANNING
55
shipment, the Borrower is responsible for import customs clearance and for the arrangement of
the further transport of the shipment.
The place named next to the Incoterms rule selected is important, since this indicates where the
goods are to be “delivered”, indicating where the risk transfers from the Supplier/Contractor to the
Borrower. For the D rules (i.e., DAP, DPU, and DPP), the place named is the place of both delivery
and final destination, requiring the Supplier/Contractor to organize carriage to that point. Under the
C rules (i.e., CFR, CIF, CPT, and CIP), the place named is the destination to which the Supplier/
Contractor must organize and pay for the carriage, which is not the final destination. To avoid any
misunderstanding, care should be taken to be as geographically specific as possible.
It is also important to specify “2020” after “Incoterms,” since this reflects the most recent version.
Most Bank SPDs use the CIP clause, which assigns responsibility and risk to the Supplier/Contractor
until the equipment is delivered to the first carrier at the place of shipment, not the place of destina-
tion. It thus becomes the Borrower’s responsibility to manage the transit from that stage, including
last-mile delive ry (the final logistics stage). This is generally done by contracting with logistics
Organizations.
If multiple logistics Organizations need to be used, it is important that the transfer between them is
seamless—there should be no ambiguities about whose responsibility it is to manage the transfer, including
the exact time and place when this will occur. To avoid this need for coordination, Borrowers may consider
engaging a Third-Party Logistics Provider (3PL), who can coordinate between different carriers and manage
all other related logistics aspects, including packaging, warehousing, and inventory management.
Borrowers should also be aware that not all logistics providers are willing to accept the standard CIP
clause, since some may have a lower risk tolerance and want to transfer ownership earlier in the
supply chain. Again, it is critical to ask questions, to not assume standard practice, and to check that
contract drafting reflects a common understanding between the parties.
Borrowers should further consider specifying in Works requirements/specification what the accep-
tance and release criteria are when the obligation to manage the transport transfers to the Borrower.
This is important since customs agencies have the power to hold shipments if documentation is not
consistent or specifications are not fulfilled. Borrowers must ensure that the goods have all necessary
customs declarations, meeting respective country requirements to avoid delays during transit.
Borrowers should, further, have a thorough understanding of the dimensions, weights, and volumes
of shipments, as even small deviations can halt the shipment’s progress if requirements are not met.
These aspects should also be captured in the contract, and all parties must fully understand their
respective roles and responsibilities.
Conclusion
This Section introduced Borrowers to activities that can be conducted as part of strategy develop-
ment and procurement planning. Carrying out these activities can help Borrowers develop a better
understanding of the potential Suppliers/Contractors’ supply chains, including any inherent risks or
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
56
potential challenges. This then provides an opportunity to address these supply chain issues in the
interactions with Suppliers/Contractors as part of the Procurement Process.
While these activities can be conducted in the sequence outlined, they should not be viewed as a
linear process, but rather as a framework, with a toolbox of activities that can be deployed as needed.
The six broad areas discussed are interconnected: insight developed with one activity, such as supply
chain mapping, will also help inform how supply chain risk should be managed.
The following checklist summarizes some of the key lessons from this Section, together with recom-
mended templates that can be used for the corresponding activity.
Section III: Learning Checklist
☐ I know how to assess a supply chain’s market and operating environment (Practical
Toolbox A)
☐ I know how to assess Borrower’s SCM capability and identify needs for capacity building
(Practical Toolbox B)
☐ I know how to identify supply chain characteristics through market research and analysis
(Practical Toolbox C)
☐ I know potential contractual clauses for small construction projects under National
Procurement (using the Borrower’s own procurement documents) that address environ-
mental and social concerns (Practical Toolbox D)
☐ I know how to determine supply chain due diligence and analysis needed based on the
Supply Positioning model (Practical Toolbox E)
☐ I know how to determine SCM implications based on the Supplier Preferencing model
(Practical Toolbox F)
☐ I know how to map a supply chain and identify possible risks (Practical Toolbox G)
☐ I know how to identify supply chain vulnerabilities (Practical Toolbox H)
☐ I know how to conduct supply chain risk assessment with the supply chain risk manage-
ment process (Practical Toolboxes I, J, K and L)
☐ I know how to identify logistics aspects relevant to the supply chain (Practical Toolbox M)
57
Supply Chain Considerations in
the Evaluation Phase
Overview
This Section introduces criteria against which the Bidders/Proposers’ supply chains can be assessed
during the evaluation phase. The evaluation criteria are generally informed by the project/procurement
risks identified in the PPSD or as part of the Procurement Plan.
This Section only covers evaluation criteria that are specific to SCM (for more detailed guidance on
evaluation, please see the Bank’s Procurement Guidance on Evaluation Criteria). The preparatory
activities described in Section III can help identify specific supply chain risks, which can then be
addressed with appropriate evaluation criteria. Comprehensiveness should be proportionate to the
complexity, risk, and value of the planned procurement.
This Section should be read with reference to the Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers,
the Standard Procurement Documents (SPD), and, if applicable, the associated User Guide relevant to
the selected SPD.
Given the various optional processes and approaches in SPDs, such as single stage vs. two-stage
procurement processes, and Best and Final Offer/Negotiations where applicable, this Section does
not go into detail about these various options, which again must be carried out in accordance with
the applicable Procurement Documents.
Assessing Bidders/Proposers against SCM criteria in the evaluation phase can be critical, since a signif-
icant amount of risk may be associated with the supply chains managed by the Bidders/Proposers. As
such, one or a combination of procurement actions may be required, which can include the following:
◾ Setting SCM qualification requirements for Bidders/Proposers, for instance, by establishing
minimum standards on how they manage their Suppliers/Subcontractors for any risks that may
occur, such as delay or poor quality
◾ Including Works requirements/specifications in the Procurement Documents, for example, by
specifying that the Bidders/Proposers’ Suppliers/Subcontractors need to have programs in
place to address environmental and social risks
◾ Setting KPIs to measure progress and implement corrective actions during contract implemen-
tation, for instance, by investigating root causes of supply chain disruptions and implementing
remedies
SECTION
IV
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
58
Applying SCM Evaluation Criteria to Support
Prequalification or Qualification
Practical Toolbox N includes potential qualifying SCM criteria that could be used as part of prequalifi-
cation (if using a two-stage process) or qualification (if using a single-stage process). Bidders/Proposers
at this stage will generally be assessed against minimum (pass/fail) qualification requirements/criteria
that are based on the Bidders/Proposers general capabilities as evidenced in their current practices
and processes (that is, the status-quo of their current operations, and not necessarily what they may
be able to do should they be awarded the specific project).
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX N: Illustrative SCM evaluation criteria
TABLE XIV Illustrative SCM evaluation criteria
SCM Criterion What to Ask For What to Evaluate
Supply risk
management
process/approach,
including risk
mitigation strategies
◾ Describe your supply
chain risk management
process/approach
◾ Describe the major risks
you have identified in your
supply chain and how
they are being addressed
◾ Describe what measures
and practices you have in
place to ensure you have
sufficient resilience in your
supply chain to deliver this
project
◾ Describe a situation where
your supply chain risk
management process/
approach helped to prevent
or mitigate a disruption in
your supply chain
◾ The supply chain risk management process/
approach by the Bidder/Proposer should be
detailed, including a list of the major risks in
the Bidder/Proposer’s supply chain and what
strategies are implemented to mitigate these
risks, an evaluation of each risk’s likelihood
of occurrence and severity of impact, disaster
response action plans, and a listing of key
personnel responsible for each risk
◾ The identified risks should also include those that
the Borrower would have listed, and they should
be relevant to the specific project
◾ The situation chosen should be of considerable
magnitude (e.g., not just a small error), and include
what strategies were pursued to address the
disruption and resume stable operations; the
description should also include lessons learned, and
what will be improved going forward so that similar
disruptions will have no or only limited impact
Supplier/ Contractor
code of conduct
◾ Provide your Supplier/
Contractor code of
conduct
◾ The code of conduct that the Bidder/Proposer
has for their Suppliers/Contractors should mirror
the Bank’s Code of Conduct for Contractor’s
Personnel, including obligations for required
conduct, mechanisms for raising concerns, and
consequences for violating the code of conduct; see
the Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents, for
example the Code of Conduct for the Request for
Work Proposals Design and Build (page 97)
(continues)
SECTION IV: SUPPL Y CHAIN CONSIDERATIONS IN THE EVALUATION PHASE
59
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX N: Illustrative SCM evaluation criteria (continued)
TABLE XIV Illustrative SCM evaluation criteria (continued)
SCM Criterion What to Ask For What to Evaluate
Supplier/Contractor
performance
◾ Describe how you
evaluate, select, and
manage your Suppliers/
Contractors
◾ Bidders/Proposers should have a formal
process for Supplier/Contractor evaluation,
selection, and management, which should
include KPIs, procedures for quality inspection,
and processes for corrective actions; if Bidders/
Proposers have a preferred Supplier/Contractor
list, information should be sought about the
inclusion criteria
Supplier/Contractor
environmental and
social performance
◾ Describe the processes
you have in place to
assess and monitor the
environmental and social
performance of your
Suppliers/Contractors
◾ Describe how you
developed and update
these processes
◾ The environmental and social supply chain
due diligence approach by the Bidders’/
Proposers’ Suppliers/Contractors should
describe how the Bidder/Proposer would
require its Suppliers/Subcontractors to meet
the relevant requirements, and how it can be
verified that these requirements are met during
contract implementation; the approach should
also describe the actions in case of
non-compliance
◾ Governance structures, strategies, risk
management protocols, metrics, and targets
should be clear, with evidence of how they are
effectively cascaded through their Suppliers/
Contractors
◾ Policies for reporting, inspections and audits
should be specific and thorough, including
timing of audits, who conducts them,
independence, what is audited, whether the
audits are announced or not, and what is done
if requirements/obligations are not met
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
60
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX N: Illustrative SCM evaluation criteria (continued)
Table XIV Illustrative SCM evaluation criteria (continued)
SCM Criterion What to Ask For What to Evaluate
Supply chain
visibility
◾ Describe the visibility you
have through your supply
chain, specifically, until
what tier you are able to
monitor your supply chain,
and what information you
are able to obtain
◾ Provide the associated
supply chain map
◾ Describe the approaches
and sources you use in
obtaining supply chain
visibility
◾ The map should capture all the direct Suppliers/
Contractors of the Bidder/Proposer, their location,
and the transportation involved from the Supplier/
Contractor to the Bidder/Proposer; more detailed
maps include the Bidder/Proposer’s second-tier
suppliers/Subcontractors (i.e., the Borrower’s
third-tier supplier) and beyond; the supply chain
map should also include the habitat type at the
source area and confirm, where possible, that the
Bidder/Proposer’s Suppliers/Contractors are not
adversely impacting these areas
◾ The more detail that is provided, the better;
information can include how diligently the Bidder/
Proposer is monitoring their Suppliers/Contractors,
including frequency of communication and
information exchange, collaboration on joint
projects, and insight into any challenges that the
Suppliers/Contractors may be experiencing (for
example, financial stress, delivery problems)
◾ This should include a description of the processes
used to gather insight, such as desk research,
scanning newspaper articles and press releases,
or supply chain mapping, including the frequency
with which these are conducted, as well as who is
responsible
Applying Rated-Type SCM Evaluation Criteria
To support the achievement of VfM, Borrowers can use rated criteria to assist in the determination
of the most advantageous Bid/Proposal. Rated criteria are increasingly used in modern procurement
practices to signal what is important to the supply market and can often encourage innovation from
Bidders/Proposers. Using rated criteria at the Bid/Proposal stage enables the Borrower to look beyond
the past performance of the Bidder/Proposer and assess the extent to which the Bid/Proposal is able
to meet or exceed the contract’s requirements.
Practical Toolbox O illustrates rated-type SCM evaluation criteria that could be applied. Please see
the Bank’s Guidance on Evaluation Criteria for details on applying rated criteria.
SECTION IV: SUPPL Y CHAIN CONSIDERATIONS IN THE EVALUATION PHASE
61
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX O: An example of rated SCM evaluation criteria
TABLE XV Illustrative rated-type SCM evaluation criteria
SCM Criterion What to Ask For What to Evaluate
Proficiency in
supply chain risk
management
◾ Describe potential SCM
risks that could occur in
the project and how you
would mitigate or manage
them
◾ The degree to which the Bidders/Proposers
demonstrates they understand the key SCM risks in
the project and the extent to which they can offer
specific management strategies to mitigate them
◾ This could include the identification of potential
vulnerabilities/choke points, specific contingency
plans, backup suppliers, safety inventory, or
secured capacity
SCM competencies
of key personnel
◾ Describe key personnel’s
experiences in managing
supply chains of a similar
complexity as the supply
chain in this project and
what their specific SCM
role would be for this
project
◾ The extent to which key personnel have
experience and capability in successfully
managing supply chains (of similar complexity
as the supply chain in this project)
◾ Clarity of SCM roles and responsibilities
Proficiency in
delivering against
environmental and
social objectives
◾ Describe what
approaches you would
undertake in your supply
chain(s) to support the
project in achieving its
environmental and social
goals
◾ The extent to which the Bidder/Proposer
demonstrates practice that is likely to support the
project in its environmental and social goals
◾ The extent to which the Bidder/Proposer
demonstrates that they are able to influence their
supply chain to successfully deliver against the
project’s environmental and social goals
◾ Specific metrics the Bidder/Proposer intends
to commit to and report on, such as training,
carbon emission reductions, roadmaps to carbon
neutrality, or the percentage of local businesses
contracted by the Bidder/Proposer for the
Borrower’s project/contract
Considering Third-Party/Independent Audits
Borrowers may also consider a third-party/independent audit or inspection. In these audits, trained
auditors typically inspect working conditions, employee safety, and pay records, examine physical
factory conditions, and conduct interviews with workers. Audits can also focus on examining certifications
and documentation for products, standards, and testing and quality management systems; reviewing
production processes and materials controls; and reviewing production equipment calibration and
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
62
maintenance records. Use of third-party/independent audits can be expensive, but if used effectively,
can lead to improvements in systems and processes. Illustrative assessment dimensions that can be
used in such an audit are provided in Example Box 14.
EXAMPLE BOX 14: Illustrative assessment dimensions for a
supplier/contractor audit
A Supplier/Contractor credibility and capacity audit report can include the following assess-
ments. Please note that these assessment dimensions are illustrative and do not apply to
all projects.
◾ Company profile, which can include information about company ownership, contact infor-
mation, and subsidiary plants
◾ Personnel, which can include an organizational chart, employee headcounts, and key staff
◾ Main market, which can include information on foreign trading staff and export information
◾ Manufacturing ability, which can include information on the main facilities (including a
listing of major machinery and instruments) and yearly output
◾ Certificates, which can include a listing of all management system certificates obtained
(such as ISO standard certifications), as well as product certifications
◾ Quality control management, which can include obligations to prevent environmental
harm, the presence of written instructions, and procedures for quality control and correc-
tive actions
◾ Development plan, which can include strategic initiatives the Organization plans to
pursue, such as the expansion of overseas markets
◾ Production flow chart, which can include an overview of the different stages the product
goes through as part of the manufacturing process
◾ Sampling, which can include information about the products that were sampled as part
of the audit
◾ Monitoring and reporting systems
◾ Engagement and communication with stakeholders and customers
In addition to the written information provided on these aspects, the audit report can also include
photographs of the products at various stages of processing, the buildings, the production floor, the
office space, and/or worker dormitories.
While audits are an important part of ascertaining a Bidder’s/Proposer’s SCM approach, the effort
needed to conduct them can be extensive due to the complexity of global supply chains. Audits are
therefore not conducted frequently. Audits are also most effective if they are unannounced, since
otherwise the Bidder/Proposer could prepare for the visit. However, most audits are preplanned due to
the need for site visit authorizations. Most auditors are skilled at reviewing Organizations and have
techniques to minimize the risks of issues being hidden from the audit. Audits may be used as part
of Bidder/Proposer evaluation and selection, but may also be used once a contract has been signed
to check that the Supplier is adhering to specified standards.
SECTION IV: SUPPL Y CHAIN CONSIDERATIONS IN THE EVALUATION PHASE
63
Preparing the Bid Evaluation Report
When preparing the Bid Evaluation Report (BER) and recommendations for contract award, Borrowers
should also describe how SCM considerations have influenced the overall contract award decision.
This can include specific supply chain risks related to the Borrower’s project/contract, the Bidder/
Proposer’s ability to mitigate them, or any other SCM capabilities the Bidder/Proposer possesses
that would be beneficial to the project/contract. The BER should also include next steps on contract
finalization, KPIs, and what SCM issues need to be documented as part of the contract management
approach.
Guidance for the contract award process is provided in the Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF
Borrowers. From an SCM perspective, Borrowers should be pragmatic and focus on materiality since
not every supply chain risk or uncertainty can be avoided, and situations vary based on specific field
operations and conditions in local markets. In most instances, there is no perfect Bidder/Proposer,
especially when it comes to their supply chains and how they are managed.
Conclusion
This Section introduced Borrowers to supply chain aspects that can be considered in the evaluation
phase. The insights obtained in Section III serve as the foundation for the development of these
criteria, enabling the Borrower to select the Bidder/Proposer with the desired SCM capabilities and
assisting with the identification of the most advantageous Bid/Proposal.
At the end of the evaluation phase, Borrowers should prepare the BER to also include how SCM
considerations influenced the evaluation of the Bidders/Proposers.
The following checklist summarizes some of the most important lessons from this Section, together
with recommended templates that can be used for the corresponding activity.
SECTION IV: Learning Checklist
☐ I know how to identify and apply SCM evaluation criteria to support prequalification or
qualification (Practical Toolbox N)
☐ I know how to develop and apply rated-type SCM evaluation criteria (Practical Toolbox O)
☐ I understand the benefits of third-party/independent audits (Example Box 14)
☐ I know how to include SCM considerations in the BER
65
Contract Management
Overview
Once the contract has been signed, the work is far from over: in many instances the hard work
of implementation has just begun. Due to the uncertainties and risks associated with managing
supply chains, Borrowers should actively manage the contract throughout implementation. For general
guidance, Borrowers should review Section 8.7 of the PPSD Procurement Guidance on Contract
Management, as well as the Bank’s Guidance on Contract Management Principles and Contract
Management Practice.
This Section will highlight SCM considerations as part of the contract management phase, including
the following:
◾ Recognizing the role of the supervising engineer in providing supply chain oversight
◾ Including SCM considerations in the Works contract mobilization plan
◾ Managing supply chain risks
◾ Managing Supplier relationships
For construction projects, Borrowers [Employers] often engage a supervising engineer who serves,
among other things, as the Borrower’s agent, supervisor, and certifier in accordance with the contract.
Due to the close contact with the main Contractor, the supervising engineer is also well positioned
to obtain insight into the Contractor’s supply chain, in particular the Suppliers and Subcontractors
that are on-site. The supervising engineer can provide the Borrower with additional supply chain
intelligence from their presence on the project site. If monitoring such aspects on the project site are
important, these should be specified in the contract with the supervising engineer if possible.
The commencement of Works normally begins with a mobilization or preconstruction phase during
which the site is prepared for construction. The supervising engineer plays a key role here, especially
in the development and implementation of the Contract mobilization plan. The actions specified in
the plan can be complemented with supply chain mobilization actions to ensure appropriate perfor-
mance monitoring and communication modalities across the supply chain, specifically with Suppliers
and Subcontractors.
A critical element in contract management is supply chain risk management, especially if the main
Contractor is relying on many Suppliers and Subcontractors (who may be relying on their own
SECTION
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
66
Suppliers and Subcontractors as well). Supply chain risk management should therefore be conducted
on a regular basis by the main Contractor, especially the monitoring of environmental and social
requirements related to Suppliers and Subcontractors.
Recognizing the Role of the Supervising Engineer in
Providing Supply Chain Oversight
The supervising engineer oversees, on the Borrower’s behalf, the main Contractor’s mobilization of
resources and the coordination of their activities. As such, the supervising engineer interacts with the
main Contractor, who is then responsible for arranging work with their Suppliers and Subcontractors.
The supervising engineer thus needs to check that the Contractor is effectively coordinating with
their Suppliers and Subcontractors to ensure smooth project delivery. This oversight is important to
deliver against schedules, budgets, and quality standards.
Taking an SCM perspective, the supervising engineer should be monitoring, for instance, that tasks
by Suppliers and Subcontractors are performed on-time and on-budget, and be vigilant for any delays
due to supply disruptions. Attention also needs to be paid to a specific sequence of work that has to
be completed before other work can commence.
As per the FIDIC Red Book, the supervising engineer can also require either party to attend the other
party’s management meetings to discuss arrangements for future works and/or other matters in
connection with the execution of the Works (clause 3.8). This is part of a proactive contract monitoring
approach, through which deviations can be discussed early and agreements can be sought. Taking
an SCM perspective, the supervising engineer could require the Contractor—including their Suppliers
and Subcontractors—to attend joint meetings to address any potential changes and issues.
The supervising engineer is also responsible for implementing and administering the Contract Manage-
ment Plan (CMP). A CMP is developed for all contracts deemed to require one per the PPSD. This
includes all Works projects classified as high-risk for sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual
harassment (SH). The CMP is a tool that provides a structured and systematic approach to planning
how, when, where, and by whom a contract is implemented, monitored, managed, and administered.
A CMP includes details on contract management roles and responsibilities, a list of contacts, KPIs, record
keeping and audit requirements, and payment procedures (for further detail on CMPs, see the Bank’s
Guidance on Contract Management Practice and the Standard Procurement Documents).
Including SCM Considerations in the Works Contract
Mobilization Plan
The commencement of Works normally begins with a mobilization or preconstruction phase during
which the site is prepared for construction. This can include, among other things, land clearance,
excavation, building access roads to the site, work site establishment, and construction of the
Contractor’s personnel accommodations. The supervising engineer plays a key role here as well,
especially in the development of the contract mobilization plan.
SECTION V: CONTRACT MANAGEMENT
67
Supply chain mobilization actions can include the following (these actions can complement the actions
already noted in the sample template in Annex 4 of the Bank’s Guidance on Contract Management
Practice, pages 102–104):
◾ Establish a system to monitor the performance of Suppliers/Subcontractors in terms of quality,
cost, and adherence to schedules
◾ Put appropriate measures in place to address environmental and social risks and impacts in
the supply chain
◾ Establish KPIs to monitor how the Contractor is managing its supply chain (see Example Box 15
for illustrative KPIs)
◾ Put appropriate measures in place that require the Contractor to proactively report on any
potential supply disruptions (Annex VII summarizes two possible supply chain dynamics that
can give rise to such disruptions)
◾ Establish a schedule of regular meetings, field visits, inspections, reviews, and audits of Suppliers/
Subcontractors
◾ Establish reporting modalities and modalities of communication between the main Contractor
(including, among others, their Suppliers, Subcontractors, and the supervising engineer)
EXAMPLE BOX 15: Illustrative SCM KPIs for Suppliers/Contractors
◾ Response time to supply chain disruptions (for example, hours or days needed to resume
work after a disruption)
◾ Frequency and magnitude of delays (as measured by the length of the delay and whether
it prevented other tasks to be performed)
◾ Specific innovation obtained from Suppliers/Subcontractors (as measured by a lower
cost or better quality made possible with the help of Suppliers/Subcontractors)
◾ Reports of incidents, accidents, and fines
◾ Supply chain reporting and auditing (measured by audit reports received as requested,
together with their comprehensiveness and adherence to requirements, for example,
environmental and social monitoring, risk monitoring)
Managing Supply Chain Risks
As part of the CMP, Borrowers also need to develop a risk management plan. Analysis conducted by
the Borrower in the PPSD and procurement planning phase can be used as a starting point to inform
the plan. The CMP can be updated as the contract progresses, for instance by adjusting likelihood
and severity values for risks, or adding new risks that emerge. Managing risks with a flexible approach
is prudent as supply chains are subject to numerous and rapidly changing external influences. Within
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
68
the construction context, this pertains to the risk of supply shortages in particular, as well as environ-
mental and social risks.
While it is important for the Borrower and supervising engineer to actively monitor and manage
risks, Suppliers/Contractors should do the same with their second-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors.
Borrowers should request regular risk updates from Suppliers/Contractors, particularly in relation to
the Suppliers’/Contractors’ supply chain. For example, while a Supplier/Contractor has the right to
claim an extension of time for exceptionally adverse climatic conditions for their own site, this FIDIC
clause (clause 8.5(c)) does not apply to adverse climatic effects in the supply chain (e.g., the delay of
needed construction material due to a tropic storm preventing the transporting vessel to reach the
destination port on time). Practical Toolbox P offers an illustrative checklist for Borrowers to conduct
ongoing supply chain risk management.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX P: Ongoing supply chain risk management
checklist
TABLE XVI Ongoing supply chain risk management checklist
☐ Regular review of any news or reports on the Suppliers’/Contractors’ industry and supply chain
(e.g., actual or impending regulations, industry supply shortages, logistics constraints)
☐ Regular review of any news on critical higher-tier Suppliers/sub-Contractors in the Suppliers’/Contractors’
supply chain (e.g., ensuring their financial health)
☐ Regular review and update of the risks in the risk management plan (as part of the CMP)
☐ Requesting regular updates from Suppliers/Contractors on any adjustments to their contingency
plans
☐ Recognizing and investigating any “red flags” in project execution (e.g., if a slight delay occurred due
to a supply chain problem, Borrowers should work to make sure that this is not the start of a bigger
problem, and that the Supplier/Contractor is implementing protocols so that this does not happen
again in the future)
If risks or challenges emerge in the Supplier’s/Contractor’s supply chain, they should be addressed
proactively in discussions with the supervising engineer. Borrowers and supervising engineers should
work with the Supplier/Contractor to address these risks or challenges, demonstrating the Borrower’s
commitment to a positive and collaborative working relationship. Termination of the contract should
always be the last resort.
A critical component of supply chain risk management is the concern for environmental and social
risks in the supply chain. For example, Works SPDs include requirements for regular environmental
and social progress reports, immediate reporting of serious environmental and social incidents, and
formal contract modification in the event of any new or amended environmental and social implica-
tions identified during implementation.
SECTION V: CONTRACT MANAGEMENT
69
Subclause 4.1 of the Contractor’s General Obligation in the Works SPD sets out that:
The Contractor shall not carry out mobilization to Site (e.g. limited clearance for haul roads,
site accesses and work site establishment, geotechnical investigations or investigations to
select ancillary features such as quarries and borrow pits) unless the Engineer gives a Notice
of No-objection to the Contractor, a Notice that shall not be unreasonably delayed, to the
measures the Contractor proposes to manage the environmental and social risks and impacts,
which at a minimum shall include applying the Management Strategies and Implementation
Plans (MSIPs) and Code of Conduct for Contractor’s Personnel submitted as part of the Bid and
agreed as part of the Contract.
The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for Review any additional MSIPs as are necessary
to manage the ES risks and impacts of ongoing Works (e.g., excavation, earthworks, bridge
and structure works, stream and road diversions, quarrying or extraction of materials, concrete
batching and asphalt manufacture). These MSIPs collectively comprise the Contractor’s Envi-
ronmental and Social Management Plan (C-ESMP). The Contractor shall review the C-ESMP,
periodically (but not less than every six (6) months), and update it as required to ensure that it
contains measures appropriate to the Works. The updated C-ESMP shall be submitted to the
Engineer for Review.
Managing Supplier Relationships
For the most significant projects, a Supplier Relationship Management (SRM) approach can help to
successfully manage supply chain risks and challenges throughout the Contract Management phase.
Since SRM requires time and commitment, the amount of effort invested into relationship should
be proportionate to the risk/value of project (normally SRM would be used for higher risk/higher
value projects).
While Borrowers and supervising engineers can ask Suppliers/Contractors to share certain infor-
mation on a regular basis, the Supplier/Contractor may not go out of their way to collect and pro-
vide this information, just sharing the bare minimum to meet the thresholds of the contract. This
may be especially true for supply chain related matters, since the Supplier/Contractor may need
to expend considerable effort to collect the information requested by the Borrower and supervising
engineer. Collaboratively, positively, and proactively engaging with Suppliers/Contractors thus
encourages greater transparency and often leads to more effective risk management and better
overall SCM.
Proactive SRM by the Borrower can also lead to increased trust, commitment, and goodwill from
the Supplier/Contractor, possibly gaining the Borrower preferential treatment from the Contractor,
and becoming a customer of choice. Illustrative benefits of this status are provided in Example
Box 16.
Borrowers can use some of the insights they gained from the Supplier Preferencing exercise to under-
stand the Supplier/Contractor’s perspective and consider how they can become a better customer.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
70
EXAMPLE BOX 16: Illustrative benefits of being a customer of choice
◾ The Supplier/Contractor may give the Borrower preference when faced with a con-
strained environment, for example in terms of supply shortages. Specifically, the Supplier/
Contractor may use the constrained supply to complete the Borrower’s project, before
using it for the project of another customer.
◾ The Supplier/Contractor may expend extra effort to expedite a delayed shipment that is
needed for the completion of the project.
◾ The Supplier/Contractor may more proactively require their higher-tier Suppliers/
Subcontractors to comply with the Borrower’s requirements.
This can be as simple as paying invoices promptly, also enabling the Supplier/Contractor to pay their
higher-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors/Primary Suppliers (i.e., the Borrower’s second-tier Suppliers)
on time. If payment is not issued when promised, this may be used as an excuse by the Supplier/
Contractor for any supply chain delays or quality issues. Not paying on time can also damage the
relationship with the Supplier/Contractor, making them less responsive to special requests or project
changes. Smaller Organizations in the supply chain may also not have sufficient cashflow to withstand
significant payment delays, putting them at risk of bankruptcy. Therefore, not paying on time may
create significant supply chain problems. Practical Toolbox Q offers some further suggestions for how
Borrowers can foster their relationship with Suppliers/Contractors.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX Q: Borrower actions to foster good Supplier/
Contractor relationships
◾ Frequent sharing of relevant information, making it easier for the Suppliers/Contractors to
perform well
◾ Being clear on specifications, answering questions, and not changing requirements
frequently
◾ Making sure the Supplier/Contractor fully understands the contractual commitments involved
in managing their supply chain
◾ Addressing supply chain challenges in a collaborative fashion; not leaving Suppliers/
Contractors to manage them on their own
◾ Assisting the Supplier/Contractor to assess environmental and social concerns in their
supply chain (for instance, training, provision of templates or policies that can be adapted)
◾ Aiming to resolve disputes in a collaborative manner
Better Supplier/Contractor relationships can also be fostered with frequent communication and
updates. While there are contractual communication requirements specified in the FIDIC Red
Book (2017) and the Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents, these should be complemented by
SECTION V: CONTRACT MANAGEMENT
71
reporting requirements in case of any impending or actual supply chain disruptions that the Supplier/
Contractor foresees, as well as possible mitigation actions. Keeping each party up to date above
and beyond the minimum that is contractually required can go a long way. Example Box 17 provides
some illustrative SCM information that could be communicated. While none of these examples may
eventually impact the supply chain (since they are merely anticipated), knowing about their potential
can be invaluable to plan ahead.
EXAMPLE BOX 17: Illustrative SCM information to communicate
◾ Anticipated supply shortages that may impact the project and plans to remedy
◾ Anticipated major environmental/social incidents or emerging risks in the supply chain
◾ Anticipated changes in the Supplier’s/Contractor’s supply base
◾ Anticipated specification change requests by the Supplier’s subcontractors (that is, the
Borrower’s second-tier Suppliers)
◾ Anticipated logistics challenges
◾ Anticipated changes in regulations that will impact the Supplier’s/Contractor’s supply chain
◾ Anticipated challenges for the Supplier’s subcontractors (that is, the Borrower’s second-
tier Suppliers), such as their financial health
Better relationships facilitate better collaboration. Collaboration between the supervising engineer,
designers, project managers, Suppliers/Contractors, and Primary Suppliers during contract execution can
yield creative and innovative solutions that benefit all parties involved. Example Box 18 provides an
illustration of such a collaboration within the context of the 2012 Olympic Games. Such collaboration
is prudent from a risk management perspective, especially in times of frequent raw material shortages
and constrained capacities. By working together, shortages can be detected earlier, and mitigation
strategies (for instance, using alternate materials and/or the re-specification of requirements) can be
devised jointly and implemented quickly.
EXAMPLE BOX 18: Collaboration as part of the 2012 Olympic Games in
London, United Kingdom39
Collaboration on construction projects as part of the 2012 Olympic Games in London, UK, led
to significantly improved outcomes. For instance, the Velodrome was originally designed to
have a traditional, structural steel roof. However, the design of the roof and the structural foun-
dation posed challenges for this approach, which led to the development of four alternative
roof designs. The final choice was a steel cable-net roof on the Velodrome, reducing needed
steel by 1000 tons, reducing installation time, reducing health and safety risk (eliminating the
need to work at great heights), achieving carbon savings of more than 27%, and achieving an
award-winning design. All of this was achieved along with a cost savings of £1.5m over the
steel arch design.
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
72
Managing supplier relationships is critical, since a contract may not be able to cover every challenge
encountered as part of a large project. The supervising engineer, again, plays a key role here: they
can proactively develop a good, collaborative, professional working relationship with the Contractor,
nurturing trust and commitment. In addition, knowing about potential risks early can help the super-
vising engineer to also develop possible alternatives.
Conclusion
This Section highlighted that once a contract has been signed, the hard work is far from over, and in
many instances, it has only just begun. Borrowers should actively manage the contract throughout
implementation. For construction projects, the supervising engineer plays a central role, serving
as the Borrower’s agent, supervisor, and certifier in accordance with the contract. The position and
expertise of the supervising engineers enable them to also offer valuable supply chain oversight,
since they can also monitor Subcontractors/Primary Suppliers performing work on the job site. This
performance monitoring can be formalized in the contract mobilization plan, which can outline KPIs
on how the Contractor is managing their supply chain and specify measures to require the Contractor
to proactively report on any potential supply disruptions. Especially in construction projects, ongoing
supply chain risk management is essential.
The Section concluded by highlighting the importance of Supplier Relationship Management, and how
developing trust and commitment with the Contractor can foster better collaboration and enhanced
project outcomes. The following checklist summarizes some of the most important lessons from this
Section, together with recommended templates that can be used for the corresponding activity.
SECTION V: LEARNING CHECKLIST
☐ I know how to discuss providing supply chain oversight with the supervising engineer
☐ I know how to include SCM considerations in the contract mobilization plan (Example
Box 15)
☐ I know how to formalize the management of supply chain risks in the CMP (Practical Toolbox P)
☐ I know how to formalize the management of Supplier/Contractor relationships (Example
Boxes 16 and 17, Practical Toolbox Q)
73
SECTION
VI
Conclusion
SCM has never been more topical and important than it is today. It is likely that critical issues we
have seen in global supply chains (that is, supply shortages, logistics issues, geopolitical events,
skills shortages, cost increases, inflation) will remain with us for the foreseeable future.
Projects are vulnerable to external shocks, making SCM critical. Even a simple product can have a
complex, global supply chain with many associated risks. Breakdowns at any point in the chain have
the potential to jeopardize the successful completion of a Borrower’s project.
Projects are also increasingly prioritizing sustainability and the management of environmental and
social risks (for example, safe working conditions, carbon emissions). Given that many of these risks
can be present within the deeper supply chain, SCM becomes increasingly important in supporting
the project to achieve any sustainability objectives it may have.
While there is no silver bullet to overcome supply chain challenges, SCM tools and approaches can help
Borrowers better understand and manage SCM risks, increasing the likelihood of project development
outcomes.
Preparation is key, and effective SCM relies on a good understanding of the supply market and
operating environment. Supply chain mapping can provide a useful starting point to identify vulnera-
bilities/chokepoints and the likelihood of critical supply failures.
A Borrower’s ability to influence Suppliers/Contractors to successfully manage SCM risks will ulti -
mately depend on, amongst other things, the capability of the Supplier/Contractor, the importance of
the project to the Supplier/Contractor, and the extent to which the Supplier/Contractor can influence
their own supply chain. Generally, Borrowers have the greatest leverage (or opportunity to influence the
Supplier/Contractor) before the contract is signed, particularly in the strategy development and
procurement planning phase.
Obligations and requirements can be a useful tool to set SCM expectations (and responsibilities) for
Suppliers/Contractors, but it is important to consider what the Supplier/Contractor is able to control
and set obligations and requirements accordingly.
On the Borrower’s side, coordination and collaboration are key to ensuring that stakeholders know
what they are responsible for in managing the supply chain (for example, who is the owner of an iden-
tified risk). The role of the supervising engineer can be important to help coordinate SCM activities.
Finally, recognizing that Borrowers have finite resources that can be dedicated to SCM analysis and due
diligence, the application of the SCM tools and approaches should be proportionate to the risk/value of
the project—with the greatest SCM emphasis on projects that have the highest risk/value profile.
75
Environmental and Social
Requirements
There are different sources of requirements and guidance related to environmental and social
sustainability in Bank-financed IPF projects. It is important for Borrowers to identify and understand
these requirements, and how they may relate to the proposed project and the activities of the dif -
ferent parties involved in delivering the project, which includes Suppliers/Contractors and Suppliers/
Subcontractors. Identifying relevant requirements will allow Borrowers to structure the project
appropriately and proactively manage environmental and social risks and impacts from the earliest
stages of a project’s lifecycle.
National Legislation and International Commitments
Borrowers need to identify the relevant requirements in national legislation, international agreements
and conventions, and sector specific guidance.40
National legislation will include many requirements relevant to SCM. Most countries have compre-
hensive labor legislation, covering terms and conditions of work, occupational health and safety, and
protection for vulnerable groups. National legislation may include requirements to carry out environ-
mental and social risk assessments for proposed projects; specify processes for use of land or land
acquisition; set out obligations relating to biodiversity; or have specific requirements for engagement
and consultation with different stakeholders. There can also be specific requirements for maximum
emission levels, quality of water discharge, and noise levels. In addition to national legislation, there
may also be regional and local legislation that needs to be adhered to.
Governments may also be subject to different international agreements or conventions, which
apply when a government is a party or has ratified these, that are relevant to SCM for the proposed
project. Examples41 include the ILO Labor Standards, the Paris Agreement, the Aarhus Convention,
the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Convention on Migratory Species, and the World Heritage
Convention.
ANNEX
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
76
The Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework
Borrowers also need to comply with lender requirements. The lenders may be multinational develop-
ment banks, such as the World Bank, or they may be commercial banks, many of which adhere to the
Equator Principles. For Bank-financed IPF projects, the Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework
(ESF) applies. This consists of:
◾ A Vision for Sustainable Development,
◾ Ten Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), which set out the requirements that apply to
Borrowers,
◾ An Environmental and Social Policy for Investment Project Financing (IPF), which sets out the
requirements that apply to the Bank, and
◾ An Environmental and Social Directive for IPF and a Directive on Addressing Risks and Impacts
on Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Individuals or Groups.
The Borrower is required to comply with the ESSs as relevant to the project, and make sure that the
contractors working in the project do the same.
The ESF specifies that “the Borrower will develop and implement an ESCP [Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan], which will set out measures and actions required for the project to achieve com-
pliance with the ESSs over a specified timeframe.” (ESS 1, paragraph 36).
This involves the identification and mitigation of significant environmental and social risks, not only
at Suppliers’/Contractors’ sites, but also at the project level i, and through supply chains to Primary
Suppliers. To support the implementation of the ESF, the Bank’s SPDs, which are used for all inter-
national procurements identified in the Procurement Plan, already have incorporated requirements
under the ESSs into standard provisions.
Practical Toolbox R offers an excerpt from Section 6 of the ESF stipulating environmental require-
ments for the purchase of natural resource commodities, while Practical Toolbox S offers an excerpt
from Section 2 of the ESF stipulating social requirements and the protection of labor conditions
and worker rights.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX R: Environmental requirements under the ESS6
Excerpt from ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
Resources:
38.  Where a Borrower is purchasing natural resource commodities, including food, timber
and fiber, that are known to originate from areas where there is a risk of significant
conversion or significant degradation of natural or critical habitats, the Borrower’s
environmental and social assessment will include an evaluation of the systems and
verification practices used by the Primary suppliers.
(continues)
ANNEX I: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL REQUIREMENTS
77
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX R: Environmental requirements under the ESS6
(continued)
39.  The Borrower will establish systems and verification practices which will:
(a)  identify where the supply is coming from and the habitat type of the source area;
(b)  where possible, limit procurement to those Suppliers that can demonstrate that
they are not contributing to significant conversion or degradation of natural or
critical habitats; and
(c)  where possible and within a reasonable period, shift the Borrower’s Primary Sup-
pliers to suppliers that can demonstrate that they are not significantly adversely
impacting these areas.
40.  The ability of the Borrower to fully address these risks will depend upon the Borrower’s
level of control or influence over its primary suppliers.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX S: Social ESF obligations under the ESS2
Excerpt from ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions:
39.  As part of the environmental and social assessment, the Borrower will identify
potential risks of child labor, forced labor and serious safety issues which may arise
in relation to primary Suppliers.
40.  Where there is a significant risk of child labor or forced labor related to primary
supply workers, the Borrower will require the primary Supplier to identify those risks
consistent with paragraphs 17 to 20 above [Protecting the work force: Child labor
and minimum age; Forced labor]. The labor management procedures will set out
roles and responsibilities for monitoring primary Suppliers. If child labor or forced
labor cases are identified, the Borrower will require the primary Supplier to take
appropriate steps to remedy them.
41.    Additionally, where there is a significant risk of serious safety issues related to pri-
mary supply workers, the Borrower will require the relevant primary Supplier to
introduce procedures and mitigation measures to address such safety issues. Such
procedures and mitigation measures will be reviewed periodically to ascertain their
effectiveness.
42.  The ability of the Borrower to address these risks will depend upon the Borrower’s level
of control or influence over its primary suppliers. Where remedy is not possible, the
Borrower will, within a reasonable period, shift the project’s primary suppliers to suppliers
that can demonstrate that they are meeting the relevant requirements of this ESS.
79
SCM is a natural development of industrial evolution, going back to the industrial revolution that took
place in the late 1800s, which replaced human labor with machine power. This improved productivity
significantly, and promoted specialization of work. Specialization has been a trend ever since, and
today’s Organizations are intricately dependent on each other.
This fact is illustrated by the average passenger car, which consists of up to 85% purchased compo-
nents. While the car Manufacturer is certainly involved in the design of the components, the Supplier/
Contractor is responsible for the production. With a typical car having thousands of parts and hundreds
of Suppliers/Contractors, managing the supply chain is critical. If just one part or component is missing,
the final product may not be delivered.
While the automobile manufacturing industry is often used as a context to describe SCM principles,
they are equally applicable to other settings. Consider, for example, a construction project whose
successful completion is dependent on a range of Suppliers/Contractors, who may also be service
providers. If, for instance, qualified electricians are not available to install the wiring, the project may
need to be put on hold—even if everything else is available. This illustrates that the supply chain is
only as strong as its weakest link.
This interdependence on Suppliers/Contractors is often well-intended, since no one Organization
can be best at everything that is needed to deliver an outcome. It is thus generally most effective
to focus on what an Organization can truly do best, that is, its core competencies, and outsource
everything else. This enables the Organization to leverage the unique and innovative capabilities of
its supply base, while at the same time being more agile and flexible.
Associated with this interdependence is, however, a significant amount of risk, since a Supplier/
Contractor does not have the same control over their supply base that they have over their own
Organization. This is most frequently felt during times of crisis, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, when
associated supply shortages arose. In these instances, it is beneficial to have a good grasp of the
supply chain, including its various tiers, as well as their constraints and challenges. Risk management
and contingency plans are also beneficial, and can help prepare for disruptions.
A Brief History of Supply
Chain Management
ANNEX
II
81
Supply Chain Management
Functions and Objectives
There are three primary functions or subdisciplines that comprise SCM, which require integration
to achieve the best outcomes (Figure XII). The three functions are briefly described in the following.
FIGURE XII Three primary functions of SCM
Supply chain management
Procurement Operations Logistics
Procurement
The primary objective of procurement is to make sure that the right product is delivered in the right
quantity, in the right quality, at the right place, at the right time, and at the right price. If any of these
“rights” are not met, a Supplier/Contractor’s operations may be interrupted, preventing them from
delivering the promised output.
It is therefore procurement’s task to ensure all inputs meet the exact specifications and are available when
they are needed. For instance, it is procurement’s job to translate stakeholder needs into requirements
for Suppliers/Contractors and then organize the Procurement Process. Specifically, procurement focuses
on developing sourcing strategies, evaluating and managing Suppliers/Contractors, and negotiations.
Inputs that enable the delivery of the outputs also include products and services. For instance, if
no trainers are available to educate the staff about how to use a medical imaging device safely and
effectively, it may do more harm than good.
Resources needed in procurement include approved Supplier/Contractor lists, knowledge, negotia-
tion skills, and contracts, with which procurement requisitions are transformed into purchase orders.
Operations
The primary objective of operations is to transform inputs into outputs. This transformation requires
resources in the form of equipment and machines, but also qualified personnel and knowledge.
ANNEX
III
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
82
If these resources are not available or if they are not well managed, the Supplier/Contractor may not
be able to deliver what they promised. It is therefore operations’ task to ensure that resources are
available, well-functioning, and best fit for the intended purpose; that is to say that it is operations’ job
to facilitate the successful transformation of inputs into outputs. Specific focus areas include process
analysis, quality management, forecasting, and demand management.
Logistics
The primary objective of logistics is to ensure the efficient and effective flow of resources from an
origin to a destination. If logistics are not coordinated well, the Supplier/Contractor may receive the
ordered inputs late or damaged, preventing them from providing their promised output.
It is therefore logistics’ task to select the most effective mode of transportation, monitor and coordinate
the transfer between logistics providers, and check that all shipping documents are completed, that is,
it is logistics’ job to check that all transportation functions seamlessly. Specific topics logistics is focused
on include distribution management, warehousing and transportation. Resources in logistics needed
include for instance trucks, fuel, routings, and knowledge, which enable the transformation of loads
into delivered goods.
The following examples illustrate the important role played by logistics.
◾ Especially for supply chains that span multiple countries, logistics may be responsible for the
coordination between potentially multiple transportation carriers and modes of transportation
(e.g., air, rail, truck), as well as the smooth transition.
◾ Logistics may also be responsible for the assurance of specific transportation conditions, such
as the cold storage for vaccines, the management of customs declarations, and the arrange-
ment of last-mile deliveries (e.g., from the destination warehouse to the final customer).
Support Functions
Supply chain managers would not be able to do their job and seamlessly integrate with each other
without support functions. Three of the most critical ones are described in the following.
Information Technology (IT)
Information technology enables the three interdependent SCM functions to coordinate their
activities. Information can be shared immedia tely with everyone that needs to know, and can be
automated, enhancing planning and forecasting. Transparency is also greatly increased, reducing
uncertainty.
For example, in an integrated information system, once a purchase order has been placed it is imme-
diately visible to operations planning, warehousing, and accounts payables, letting them know that a
new batch of products is about to be delivered and that an invoice is to be expected.
ANNEX III: SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES
83
Human Resources
Supply chains must be managed, and this is where human resources come in. While IT is a great
enabler, it cannot replace humans. Knowledgeable employees need to be hired and retained, which
has become increasingly challenging. Specific skills are needed to effectively manage supply chains,
which may involve building business relationships and weighing the pros and cons of a decision
that is not straightforward.
Legal
When it comes to writing a contract or navigating disputes, an Organization’s legal department is
indispensable. While frameworks such as the FIDIC Red Book for construction can provide great
guidance, expert advice to craft a comprehensive contract that covers the Borrower is still needed.
85
Possessing Analytical Capabilities
Building supply chain resilience is a complex task, requiring a wide variety of data and information to
be absorbed and processed to facilitate well-rounded decision-making. Having the ability to make
sense of all this information and base decisions on it requires an analytical mindset. Borrowers with
analytical mindsets ask many “why” questions to improve project outcomes.
With an analytical mindset, Borrowers can find creative solutions to roadblocks faced in a project.
Brainstorming and an entrepreneurial attitude are helpful in this regard.
Feeling Empowered
Effective supply chain managers possess a sense of ownership, proactively and independently monitoring
and managing supply chains, and anticipating challenges and roadblocks. This should not just be left
to the Suppliers/Contractors.
Borrowers must develop a thorough understanding of supply chain issues. This knowledge can
empower Borrowers to be flexible and agile, make decisions that are out of the ordinary, and effec-
tively respond to emergencies. While the visibility into and control of higher-tier Suppliers/Contractors
may be limited, Borrowers should ask Suppliers/Contractors questions about their supply chain
design and any risk mitigation approaches they have in place. Protocols should also be established
about when Suppliers/Contractors are to notify the Borrower about delays or concerns occurring at
higher-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors.
Being an Effective Communicator
Possessing analytical capabilities and feeling empowered are important skills; the next step for
supply chain managers is to communicate their strategy clearly and effectively to stakeholders. Since
this might involve a significant change to how things were done previously, the message should be
communicated convincingly. Stakeholders not only have to agree to the change, but they should also
be convinced that this is the best path forward.
When negotiating with Suppliers/Contractors, Borrowers must be well prepared and have arguments
and/or data to back up their point. This can include knowledge about how the supply chain of the
Supplier/Contractor is likely structured as well as the associated constraints and risks. Arguments
Skillsets to Build Supply
Chain Resilience
ANNEX
IV
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
86
should be presented in a confident, clear, and concise manner. Being an effective communicator how-
ever also means to practice active listening, showing empathy, and being responsive to the concerns
of the Supplier/Contractor.
Taking a Big Picture and Identifying Everything the
Project Needs
To develop the best strategy, Borrowers should think about what the best solution for the target
population is, and whether this solution is feasible. For example, it is not sufficient to merely procure a
sophisticated medical equipment: the equipment also needs to be safely transported to the destination
(potentially via armed escorts for high-value items). Experts may also be needed to set up the equipment
at the destination, and the equipment may require an appropriate installation environment (for instance,
a climate-controlled room with high-capacity electricity). There also need to be trained technicians that can
safely operate and maintain the equipment on a consistent basis. Consumables required for equipment
operation must also be available on an ongoing basis. Borrowers must consider the demand and supply
of these consumables, and consider this when negotiating with the Supplier/Contractor. For instance,
a service/availability guarantee for these consumables could be negotiated with the Supplier/
Contractor, or the Supplier/Contractor could be incentivized to carry strategic stockpiles nearby.
Example Box 19 provides an illustration of what needs to be considered as part of the vaccine
supply chain.
EXAMPLE BOX 19: The vaccine supply chain
Once vaccines for COVID-19 had been successfully developed, several other challenges pre-
sented themselves:
◾ Cold supply chain management: Vaccines had to be stored at a constant, low temperature
during transportation, placing additional constraints on the choice of transportation carriers.
The switch between different carriers also needed to be seamless, and accountability for
the vaccine needed to be clearly spelled out, ensuring that the constant low temperature
is maintained also during transfer.
◾ Last-mile-delivery: When the vaccine was delivered to a local warehouse, the last-mile-
delivery needed to be organized, that is, the final delivery to health care centers. The chal-
lenge here was that many international transportation providers could not perform this last
step, so a local provider that could accommodate the cold chain and tracking requirements
needed to be found, bearing in mind that sometimes the final destination was in a remote
location. In addition, the handover needed to be managed carefully, ensuring appropriate
storage requirements at the warehouse and an expeditious handover to the local provider
to get the vaccines to where they were needed as quickly as possible.
◾ Health care centers: The destinations where the vaccines were administered needed
to be equipped with ultra-cold freezers to safely store the vaccines. At times these were
simply not available.
ANNEX IV: SKILLSETS TO BUILD SUPPL Y CHAIN RESILIENCE
87
Being Creative and Thinking Outside the Box
Being creative and thinking outside the box can facilitate the development of a much more powerful
procurement strategy. Consider the following:
◾ Gaining leverage by coordinating procurement across different projects in the same industry:
There is great potential for this approach in the health care sector in particular. Rather than
every health center procuring from Suppliers/Contractors on their own, a regional or national
group purchasing organization (GPO) could be established to procure the needed items
from Suppliers/Contractors in bulk, bundling the budgets of participating health centers. This
generates savings through quantity discounts and reduces administrative work at the local
health centers. Approaching Suppliers/Contractors with a single voice can also incentivize them
to develop supply chain infrastructure in the country, such as distribution centers or warehouses,
enabling a more efficient and effective supply.
◾ Value analysis/value engineering: Value can be expressed as the relationship between
a product’s function and the resources necessary to produce it. The objective in value analysis
and value engineering is to reduce cost and/or improve performance (performance dimen-
sions can include quality, reliability, or speed). Value analysis is the approach applied to
existing products, processes, or services, while value engineering is the approach applied to new
products, processes or services that are being developed. Value engineering applied as part
of the construction of a health care facility could include designing the building so that most
commonly used services are located on the ground level, enabling staff to provide services
most efficiently.
◾ Counteracting corruption and unethical behavior: Borrowers are sometimes challenged by
local structures that make awarding the contract based on objective criteria difficult. This can
be due to unofficial relationships among Suppliers/Contractors who agree on who should
get the next contract, or contracts that include rebates given to an individual person for
their personal gain. To avoid such collusion and change behavior, consistent, objective, and
transparent processes need to be developed.
89
This Annex illustrates how each of the seven Core Procurement Principles of the Bank’s Procurement
Policy provides direction for supply chain management. For this purpose, illustrative SCM questions
are provided for each principle.
The Bank’s vision for IPF procurement, as stated in its Procurement Regulations, is as follows:
Procurement in Investment Project Financing (IPF) supports Borrowers to achieve value for
money (VfM) with integrity in delivering sustainable development.
To support this vision, the Bank developed a set of Core Procurement Principles (Figure XIII) as part
of its Procurement Framework. Each of these principles has implications for SCM.
FIGURE XIII The Bank’s core procurement principles
Value for money
Economy
Transparency
Integrity
Eﬃciency
Fit-for-
Purpose
Fairness
WORLD BANK’S
CORE
PROCUREMENT
PRINCIPLES
While the Procurement Principles provide policy direction for Borrowers on how to evaluate, select,
and manage Suppliers (that is, Manufacturers or Contractors), applying an SCM lens also helps
Borrowers broaden their perspective and ask the right questions about the Supplier/Contractor’s
supply chain. This should result in more robust supply chains, reducing risk for Borrowers. How each
SCM and the Bank’s
Procurement Principles
ANNEX
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
90
of the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles can provide direction for supply chain management is
illustrated below. Similar to the overriding Procurement Principles, these questions should be kept
in mind during the entire Procurement Process, in particular during the early stages of strategy
development and procurement planning, as well as when potential Suppliers/Contractors are assessed
and evaluated.
Value for Money (VfM)
◾ To what degree is the Supplier/Contractor emphasizing VfM with their Suppliers/Subcontractors?
◾ How effectively is the Supplier/Contractor managing their Suppliers/Subcontractors?
◾ What is the Supplier/Contractor doing to improve the management of costs and increase
benefits in its supply chain(s)?
◾ How is the Supplier/Contractor assessing risks in its supply chain(s)?
◾ What non-price attributes is the Supplier/Contractor using to assess its supply chain(s)?
◾ How does the Supplier/Contractor weigh price and non-price attributes?
Economy
◾ To what degree is the Supplier/Contractor emphasizing sustainability, quality, and/or life cycle
costs with its Suppliers/Subcontractors?
◾ To what degree is the Supplier/Contractor applying economic, environmental, and social consid-
erations in its Supplier/Subcontractor evaluation, selection, and management?
Integrity
◾ What are the Supplier/Contractor’s standards of ethics when managing their supply chain(s)?
How likely are Suppliers/Contractor to engage in fraud and corruption in their supply chain(s)?
◾ To what degree is the Supplier/Contractor’s supply chain management aligned with the public
interest and the broader principles of good governance?
Fit-for-Purpose
◾ To what degree is the Supplier/Contractor willing to tailor its supply chain management to meet
project development objectives and outcomes?
◾ To what degree does the Supplier/Contractor consider the context, the risk, the value, and the
complexity of our project and relay these expectations to its supply chain(s)?
Efficiency
◾ To what degree are the Supplier/Contractor’s SCM efforts proportional to the value and risk
of the project?
◾ Is the Supplier/Contractor emphasizing timeliness and avoiding delays in its supply chain(s)?
ANNEX V: SCM AND THE BANK’S PROCUREMENT PRINCIPLES
91
Transparency
◾ To what degree does the Supplier/Contractor disclose its SCM practices and provide appropriate
documentation (for instance, in terms of ensuring environmental and social sustainability through
its supply chain(s))?
◾ How responsive is the Supplier/Contractor to requests for SCM information?
Fairness
◾ How is the Supplier/Contractor evaluating, selecting, and managing its Suppliers/Subcontractors?
◾ To what degree is there an equitable distribution of rights and obligations among the Supplier/
Contractor and its supply chain members?
◾ To what degree does the Supplier/Contractor have mechanisms in place through which their
Suppliers/Subcontractors can raise complaints?
93
Supply Chain SWOT Analysis
As part of the PPSD , Borrowers are required to identify strengths, weakness, opportunities, and
threats (SWOT) as part of their procurement planning process. Strengths and weaknesses are
generally aspects internal to the Organization, while opportunities and threats refer to external
dynamics.
Information gathered and analyzed through the approaches discussed in this Guidance can be valu-
able inputs for a SWOT analysis, which provides an effective framework for organizing and refining
information, giving Borrowers more confidence in their chosen approach.
Strengths within an SCM context enable the Borrower to effectively assess, monitor, and manage the
supply chain, while weaknesses prevent the Borrower from doing so. Opportunities are factors in the
external business environment that make it easier for the Borrower to practice SCM, while threats
could jeopardize this capability. Practical Toolbox T provides an illustration of the types of questions
Borrowers could ask during an SCM-focused SWOT analysis.
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX T: Supply chain SWOT analysis
Table XVII provides illustrative leading questions that can help Borrowers to identify strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats pertaining to their ability to effectively assess and
monitor the supply chain of Suppliers/Contractors.
TABLE XVII Supply chain SWOT analysis
Strengths Weaknesses
◾ What unique insight into the supply chain do we have
that enables us to design and manage the contract
with the Supplier/Contractor more proactively?
◾ What resources do we have internally to conduct
extensive supply chain mapping and monitoring
(for example, skills, knowledge, and expertise)?
◾ What capabilities and skills do we need to
develop to better assess and manage the
Supplier/Contractor’s supply chain(s)?
◾ What insight are we currently lacking that would
help us to develop a better understanding of the
supply chain(s)?
Supply Chain SWOT and
PESTLE Analysis
ANNEX
VI
(continues)
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
94
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX T: Supply chain SWOT analysis (continued)
TABLE XVII Supply chain SWOT analysis
Strengths Weaknesses
◾ What supply chain insights can we obtain from
our external partners and stakeholders (that is,
supervising engineers, Consultants, subject matter
experts, Bank staff)?
◾ What supply chain insights and experience
can we apply from prior projects (lessons
learned)?
◾ How can we best leverage our good relationships
with current Suppliers/Contractors?
◾ How can we improve our external relationships
to obtain valuable supply chain information?
◾ What lessons can we apply from prior supply
chain challenges that we have encountered?
◾ Can we mobilize the necessary resources
to complete some/all of the SCM work
needed?
◾ How can we improve our current relationships
with Suppliers/Contractors?
Opportunities Threats
◾ What resources have become available to better
monitor and manage supply chains (for instance,
publications, training)?
◾ What regulations or government policies are
in place to make the supply chain’s primary
industry operate in a more predictable and
reliable way?
◾ How can technology enhance supply chain
monitoring and management?
◾ Have new Suppliers/Contractors entered the
market that would better fit our needs?
◾ What trends have made it more difficult for
us to monitor and manage the supply chain
(for instance, more complex or longer supply
chains, Supplier/Contractor consolidation,
deregulation)?
◾ How have external pressures created
challenges for our ability to manage and
monitor supply chains (for example, inflation,
COVID-19, political tensions)?
◾ How widespread is fraud and corruption in the
supply chain(s)?
Supply Chain PESTLE Analysis
PESTLE, which stands for Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, and Environmental, is a
tool for understanding the external forces that influence and shape a market and its supply chains.
It is valuable for understanding the pressures a supply chain may be under, helping Borrowers to
consider these factors in their SCM approach and thus minimizing risks.
Similar to Supply Chain SWOT analysis, Borrowers can ask a set of questions geared towards gaining
a better understanding of the supply chain’s context. Borrowers can take a broader perspective and
consider these dimensions within the context of the project’s supply chain. Table XVIII in Practical
Toolbox U offers illustrative questions Borrowers could ask.
ANNEX VI: SUPPL Y CHAIN SWOT AND PESTLE ANAL YSIS
95
PRACTICAL TOOLBOX U: Supply chain PESTLE analysis
Table XVIII provides leading questions that can help identify political, economic, social, techno-
logical, legal, and environmental risks in supply chains. PESTLE analysis provides a framework
for considering how these factors may influence the project’s SCM approach. PESTLE analysis
is especially relevant when supply chains span multiple states, regions and/or countries, that
may operate in very different contexts.
TABLE XVIII Supply chain PESTLE analysis
Political  ◾ What is the nature and stability of the governments in each of the states, regions and/
or countries in which supply chain Organizations are located?
◾ What is the level of government intervention in the market? Are there industries that
are supported by government, and what implications does this have for the supply
chain?
◾ What is the level of bureaucracy? What is the level of fraud and corruption? To what
degree does the rule of law apply?
◾ Are there any current or developing geopolitical tensions that may impact current/
future trading relationships?
Economic  ◾ What are current and anticipated future interest rates, tax systems, economic growth
dynamics, inflation pressures, and exchange rates?
◾ What implications does this have on workforce availability, commodity prices, and
economic health in the states, regions and/or countries involved?
Social  ◾ What are the dominant social trends that could influence demand for the products or
services (for instance, population growth/decline, change in behaviors/tastes)?
◾ What can influence the ability or willingness of employees to work?
◾ What are typical employment structures in the supply chain (for example, temporary
vs. full-time employment, hiring of foreign workers)?
◾ What social standards are in place to prevent forced labor, ensure fair wages, and
provide a safe working environment?
Technological  ◾ What is the availability of technological infrastructure and associated information in
the states, regions and/or countries the supply chain spans? What are associated
challenges and opportunities?
◾ What is the rate of technological change?
◾ Is knowledge about how to best use advanced information technology available?
Legal  ◾ How different is the legal environment in the states, regions and/or countries involved?
◾ What implications does this have for the successful completion of the project; for example,
regarding environmental and social concerns, employment law, and health and safety?
◾ How might legal changes impact the supply chain’s ability to successfully support the project?
Environmental  ◾ What is the level of environmental concern in the states, regions and/or countries of
the supply chain? Are there significant discrepancies that would make supply chain
management more challenging?
◾ What are the regulations, standards, and requirements at each stage of the supply chain?
97
With increasing specialization and more complex supply chains, information sharing up and down
the supply chain is critical to effective communication and coordination. This is especially important
since higher-tier Suppliers/Subcontractors may provide critical inputs without which the project
cannot be completed. Two commonly encountered supply chain dynamics can be alleviated with
such information sharing.
The first dynamic is the “bullwhip effect,” which refers to unexpected variability in orders creating even
greater volatility in demand higher up in the supply chain. Consider a local healthcare center ordering
a much larger quantity of syringes than usual from a distributor due to a vaccine drive. The distributor,
not knowing the reason for the surge in demand, is caught off-guard and is now struggling to fulfill
the order. To avoid the same situation in the future, the distributor orders a much larger quantity from the
wholesaler. The wholesaler may have the same experience: they are caught off-guard, and to be able to
fulfill the need better in the future, they now order even more from their Supplier/Contractor. Had the
distributor and wholesaler known the reason for the spike in demand (that is, that it was only short-term),
they would not have reacted by immediately adjusting their orders in this fashion. Figure XIV provides
a simple illustration of these demand swing exaggerations as one moves higher up in the supply chain.
Communication from lower tiers in the supply chain (that is, the Borrower or the main Supplier/Contractor)
to their higher tiers is thus important, avoiding supply change confusion.
FIGURE XIV Demand exaggeration across the supply chain
Borrower
Third-Tier
Supplier
Second-Tier
Supplier
Manufacturer/
Contractor
The second dynamic is the “ripple effect,” which is the idea that even disruptions that occur at Suppliers/
Contractors far removed from the main producer or Contractor can “ripple” through the supply chain
and jeopardize the completion of the project. Due to the propagation of disruptions through the
supply chain, it is important to ensure that smaller disruptions higher up in the supply chain are also
communicated down the supply chain. Even small disruptions, although they may seem far removed,
can impact the ability of the project to be completed on time and on budget.
Supply Chain Dynamics
ANNEX
VII
99
1  World Bank. (2022). Procurement in World Bank Investment Project Financing: Review of Results After Five
Y ears of Implementation of the Procurement Framework—FY17 to FY21, https://www.worldbank.org/en/
projects-operations/products-and-services/publication/procurement-in-world-bank-investment-project-
financing-review-of-results-after-five-years-of-implementation
2  Brown, M. (2021). Priorities for sourcing and procurement for 2021. Supply Chain Management Review,
25(4), 52–55.
3  Choudhary, N. A., Singh, S., Schoenherr, T., & Ramkumar, M. (2022). Risk assessment in supply chains:
a state-of-the-art review of methodologies and their applications. Annals of Operations Research, 1–43.
4  Knight, L., Tate, W., Carnovale, S., Di Mauro, C., Bals, L., Caniato, F., . . . & Wagner, S. M. (2022). Future
business and the role of purchasing and supply management: opportunities for ‘business-not-as-usual’
PSM research. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 28(1), 100753.
5  Melnyk, S. A., Schoenherr, T., Speier-Pero, C., Peters, C., Chang, J. F., & Friday, D. (2022). New challenges
in supply chain management: cybersecurity across the supply chain. International Journal of Production
Research, 60(1), 162–183.
6  Schoenherr, T., Mena, C., & Choi, T. (2019). Measuring and managing risks in supply chains. CAPS
Research Report, Tempe, AZ.
7 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). (2021). Combating trafficking in human beings
and labor exploitation in supply chains. Guidance for OSCE Procurement. Vienna, Austria.
8 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). (2021). Combating trafficking in human beings
and labor exploitation in supply chains. Guidance for OSCE Procurement. Vienna, Austria.
9  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (2011). Marrakech Task Force on Sustainable Public
Procurement. https://sustainableprocurement.eu.com/documents/MTFonSPPReportCSD19FINAL.pdf
10  Bureau of International Labor Affairs (2023). List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor.
U.S. Department of Labor. https://sustainableprocurement.eu.com/documents/MTFonSPPReport
CSD19FINAL.pdf
11  Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). (2021). Combating trafficking in human
beings and labor exploitation in supply chains. Guidance for OSCE Procurement. Vienna, Austria.
12  Graff, S. (2022). Building Sustainable Supply Chains, Supply & Demand Chain Executive. https://www.
sdcexec.com/sustainability/carbon-footprint/article/22591456/resource-recycling-system-rrs-building-
sustainable-supply-chains
13  Bové, A.-T., & Swartz, S. (2016). Starting at the source: Sustainability in supply chains. McKinsey
Sustainability, https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/sustainability/our-insights/starting-at-the-source-
sustainability-in-supply-chains
14  Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). (2021). Combating trafficking in human
beings and labor exploitation in supply chains. Guidance for OSCE Procurement. Vienna, Austria.
15  CIPS. (2017). Protecting human rights in the supply chain: A guide for public procurement practitioners. Char-
tered Institute of Purchasing and Supply, May, https://respect.international/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/
Protecting-human-rights-in-the-supply-chain-A-guide-for-public-procurement-practitioners.pdf
16  Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). (2021). Combating trafficking in human
beings and labor exploitation in supply chains. Guidance for OSCE Procurement. Vienna, Austria.
Endnotes
SUPPL Y CHAIN MANAGEMENT: AN INTRODUCTION AND PRACTICAL TOOLSET FOR PROCUREMENT PRACTITIONERS
100
17  Bunni, N.G. 2013. The FIDIC forms of contract. Fourth Edition. John Wiley & Sons.
18  Designing Buildings. (2021). Supply chains in construction. December 23, https://www.designingbuildings.
co.uk/wiki/Supply_chains_in_construction
19  Fenton, M. (2021). The importance of contractual joint ventures for improving delivery of major infra -
structure projects. ICE Publishing, August  12, https://www.icevirtuallibrary.com/page/ice-news/164-
the-importance-of-contractual-joint-ventures-for-major-infrastructure-projects
20  Godwin, W. 2020. The 2017 FIDIC contracts. John Wiley & Sons.
21  Rigby Delmon, V. (2020). 5 Trends in public-private partnerships in water supply and sanitation. The
World Bank, December  2, https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/5-trends-public-
private-partnerships-water-supply-and-sanitation
22  Scott Nabers, M. (2018). Government leaders are beginning to turn to collaborative joint ventures for
water projects. Water Online, September 12, https://www.wateronline.com/doc/government-leaders-
are-beginning-to-turn-to-collaborative-joint-ventures-for-water-projects-0001
23  World Bank. (2020). Industry engagement water sector market analysis report. Industry Engagement
Program.
24  United Nations. (2012). Framework agreements. Trade Facilitation Implementation Guide, https://tfig.unece.
org/contents/framework-agreements.htm
25  GSA. (2022). Partnering. U.S. General Services Administration, https://www.gsa.gov/real-estate/design-
and-construction/construction-excellence/partnering
26  Deloitte. (2021). The food value chain: A challenge for the next century. https://www2.deloitte.com/
content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Consumer-Business/dttl_cb_Food%20Value%20Chain_
Global%20POV.pdf
27  McKinsey (2020). How will African farmers adjust to changing patterns of precipitation? McKinsey
Global Institute, Case Study, May 2020, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/
our-insights/how-will-african-farmers-adjust-to-changing-patterns-of-precipitation
28 USDA (2022). USDA agri-food supply chain assessment: Program and policy options for strengthening
resilience. U.S. Department of Agriculture, February, https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/
USDAAgriFoodSupplyChainReport.pdf
29  Leonard, M. (2021). Toyota, citing lessons learned from 2011 earthquake, expects no major semiconductor
impact. Supply Chain Dive, May 14, https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/toyota-semiconductor-
shortage-earthquake-inventory-ihs-gartner-forecast-2022/600193/
30  Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs. (2013). London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games—
The Legacy: Sustainable Procurement for Construction Projects, A Guide. July, https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/224038/pb13977-sustain-
able-procurement-construction.PDF
31 Schoenherr, T., Mena, C., & Choi, T. (2019). Measuring and managing risks in supply chains. CAPS Research
Report, Tempe, AZ.
32 Schoenherr, T., Mena, C., & Choi, T. (2019). Measuring and managing risks in supply chains. CAPS Research
Report, Tempe, AZ.
33  McKinsey & Company. (2020). The next normal in construction: How disruption is reshaping the world’s
largest ecosystem. McKinsey White Paper.
34  World Bank. (2020). Industry Engagement Water Sector Market Analysis Report. Industry Engagement
Program, April.
35  Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). (2021). Combating trafficking in human
beings and labor exploitation in supply chains. Guidance for OSCE Procurement. Vienna, Austria.
36  Hewitt, A. (2017). How to deal with delay caused by a nominated subcontractor. Claims Class, July 19,
https://www.constructionclaimsclass.com/deal-delay-caused-nominated-subcontractor/
37  ISO 22095:2020. Chain of custody: General terminology and models. https://www.iso.org/standard/
72532.html
38  Gonzalez, D., Beckett, M., and Whitlock, B. (2022). Preparing for the worst is the best logistics strategy—
Now more than ever. Gartner , March 18, https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/preparing-for-the-worst-
is-the-best-logistics-strategy-now-more-than-ever-1
ENDNOTES
101
39 Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs. (2013). London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games—
The Legacy: Sustainable Procurement for Construction Projects. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/224038/pb13977-sustainable-procure-
ment-construction.PDF
40  World Bank. (2022). Managing Environmental and Social Issues in Public Private Partnerships.
41  World Bank. (2022). Managing Environmental and Social Issues in Public Private Partnerships.
For additional information, such as Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs), Guidance, briefing,
training and e-learning materials see www.worldbank.org/procurement