PROCUREMENT GUIDANCE
NOVEMBER 2023
Procurement under World Bank
Investment Project Financing
A BEGINNER’S
GUIDE FOR
BORROWERS
Published November 2023—Second Edition
Published April 2018—First Edition
Copyright © 2023 The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
Disclaimer
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as
long as full attribution to this work is given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary
rights, should be addressed to:
Office of the Publisher
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC
20433 USA
Fax: 202-522-2422
Email: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Common Abbreviations and
Defined Terms
This section explains the common terms and abbreviations used in this Guidance. Defined terms are
written using capital letters.
Abbreviation/Term Full Terminology/Definition
Best and Final
Offer (BAFO)
A near final Bid/Proposal in a multistage procurement process. During this
stage the Bidder/Proposer has an opportunity to refine the Bid/Proposal.
Bank The World Bank.
Bid An offer, by a firm or joint venture, in response to a Request for Bids to
provide the required Goods, Works, or Non-Consulting Services.
Bidder A firm or joint venture that submits an offer, called a bid, to supply Goods,
Works, or Non-Consulting Services.
Borrower A Borrower or recipient of World Bank Investment Project Financing and
any other entity involved in the implementation of a project financed by
Investment Project Financing.
Business Day Any day that is an official working day of the Borrower. It excludes the
Borrower’s official public holidays.
Consultant A variety of private entities, joint ventures, or individuals that provide
services of an advisory or professional nature. Where the Consultant is an
individual, they are not engaged as an employee.
Consulting
Services
A range of services that are of an advisory or professional nature and are
provided by Consultants.
Core Procurement
Principles
The Bank’s Core Procurement Principles (value for money, economy,
integrity, fit for purpose, efficiency, transparency and fairness) are set
out in detail in Section III.C of Bank Policy: Procurement in IPF and Other
Operational Procurement Matters.
Evaluation Criteria Price and non-price criteria, including Rated Criteria when applicable, that
define how the Borrower assesses which Bidder/Proposer provides the
Most Advantageous Bid.
Goods A category of procurement that includes commodities, raw materials,
machinery, equipment, vehicles, plant, etc.
GPN General Procurement Notice.
HEIS Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support.
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, an institution of
the World Bank Group.
ICSID International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, an institution of
the World Bank Group.
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
ii
Abbreviation/Term Full Terminology/Definition
IDA International Development Association, an institution of the World Bank Group.
IFC International Finance Corporation, an institution of the World Bank Group.
Investment Project
Financing (IPF)
The Bank’s financing of investment projects that aim to promote poverty
reduction and sustainable development. IPF supports projects with defined
development objectives, activities, and results, and disburses the proceeds
of Bank financing against specific eligible expenditures.
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, an institution of the World Bank
Group.
Most
Advantageous
Bid/Proposal
(MABP)
The Bid or Proposal that meets the qualification criteria and has been
determined to be substantially responsive to the Request for Bids or
Request for Proposals and has been evaluated as the highest-ranked Bid
or Proposal, as defined in the Procurement Regulations paragraphs 5.68 to
5.71 and Procurement Regulations Annex X Evaluation Criteria.
See Section IV of this Guidance for more detailed information on how
MABP is applied in practice.
Non-Consulting
Services
Services that are not Consulting Services. Non-Consulting Services are
normally bid and contracted on the basis of performance of measurable
outputs, for which performance standards can be clearly identified and
consistently applied. Examples include drilling, aerial photography, satellite
imagery, mapping, and so on.
PAD Project Appraisal Document.
PP Procurement Plan.
PPSD Project Procurement Strategy for Development.
Procurement
Documents
A generic term used in the Procurement Regulations to cover all Procurement
Documents issued by the Borrower to potential Applicants/Bidders/
Proposers. It includes: GPN, SPN, REoI, prequalification document, Initial
Selection document, RFB, RFP, forms of contracts, and any addenda.
Procurement
Process
A process that starts with the identification of a need and continues
through planning, preparation of specifications/requirements, budget
considerations, selection, contract award, and contract management. It
ends on the last day of the warranty period.
Procurement
Regulations
The World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for Investment Project
Financing. These Regulations set the rules for how procurements under
IPF are handled.
Proposal An offer, in response to an RFP, which may or may not include price, by one
party to provide Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services, or Consulting
Services to another party.
iii
COMMON ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINED TERMS
Abbreviation/Term Full Terminology/Definition
Rated Criteria Rated Criteria are used to evaluate non-price attributes of Bids/Proposals,
including quality, risks/mitigations, VfM opportunities, sustainability, and
other technical aspects.
Specific references in the Procurement Regulations include:
◾ Paragraph 5.50. Evaluation Criteria—requirement to apply Rated
Criteria for procurements subject to international competition, for
which a Bank Document is used.
◾ Paragraphs 5.60 and 5.70—MABP.
◾ Section VI, Paragraph 6.1—Matrix of Approved Selection Methods for
Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services.
◾ Section VI, Paragraph 6.37—Use of Rated Criteria.
◾ Annex X—Evaluation Criteria.
REOI Request for Expressions of Interest.
RFB Request for Bids.
RFP Request for Proposals.
RFQ Request for Quotations.
SEA/SH Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment.
SOE State-Owned Enterprise.
SPN Specific Procurement Notice.
Standard
Procurement
Documents (SPDs)
Procurement documents issued by the Bank to be used by Borrowers
for IPF-financed projects. These documents include: GPN, SPN, REOI,
Standard Prequalification documents, Initial Selection documents, RFBs,
and RFPs.
VfM Value for Money.
Works A category of procurement that refers to construction, repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, restoration, and maintenance of civil work structures, and related
services such as transportation insurance, installation, commissioning, and
training.
World Bank The World Bank comprises two WBG institutions, the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), which assists middle-income
and creditworthy poorer countries, and the International Development
Association (IDA), which focuses on the world’s poorest countries.
World Bank Group
(WBG)
The World Bank Group is a unique global partnership of five institutions
working for sustainable solutions that reduce poverty and build shared
prosperity in developing countries. The five institutions are the IBRD, IDA,
IFC, MIGA, and ICSID.
Contents
Common Abbreviations and Defined Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i
SECTION I . Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Purpose ......................................................................... 1
World Bank Group ................................................................ 1
World Bank ................................................................... 2
Investment Project Financing ....................................................... 3
Geographic regions and countries .................................................. 3
SECTION II . Procurement Vision and Core Principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Procurement Vision ............................................................... 5
Core Procurement Principles ....................................................... 5
SECTION III . Governance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Procurement Rules ................................................................ 9
Financing Agreement .......................................................... 9
Roles and Responsibilities......................................................... 10
Borrower .................................................................... 10
Bank........................................................................ 10
Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support ..................................... 11
Eligibility ......................................................................... 11
Exceptions .................................................................. 12
Integrity......................................................................... 13
Application .................................................................. 13
Bank’s Audit and Inspection Rights ............................................. 13
Sanctions and Remedies ...................................................... 13
Section IV . Procurement Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Procurement Process Overview.................................................... 15
1. Develop Strategy .......................................................... 16
2. Plan the Procurement ...................................................... 22
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
vi
3. Invite Offers............................................................... 22
4. Receive and Open Offers ................................................... 23
5. Evaluate Offers ............................................................ 23
6. Contract Award............................................................ 25
7. Contract Management...................................................... 27
Simplified Process for Emergencies and Capacity Constraints ......................... 27
ANNEX A . Additional Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Procurement Framework.......................................................... 29
Mandatory Documents ........................................................ 29
Procurement Guidance........................................................ 29
Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30
Standard Procurement Documents ............................................. 31
Learning .................................................................... 31
Contact the World Bank........................................................... 31
Introduction
Purpose
This Guidance provides an introduction for new users to the World Bank’s (the Bank’s) Procurement
Policy and Procurement Regulations. It summarizes the information Borrowers need when undertaking
procurements funded by Bank Investment Project Financing (IPF). This Guidance should be read in
conjunction with the Bank’s Procurement Policy and Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers.
As such, this Guidance is not mandatory and is offered as an overview only.
Further information and references:
World Bank
IBRD—International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA—International Development Association
IPF—Investment Project Financing
Where We Work—Seven regions and over 170 countries
IPF-Funded Procurement
Bank rules—Procurement Framework
Procurement—Regulations
Procurement—Policy
World Bank Group
The World Bank (Bank) is part of the wider World Bank Group (WBG). The WBG is one of the world’s
largest sources of funding and knowledge for developing countries. The WBG comprises five insti-
tutions, as shown in Figure 1. These institutions work together for sustainable solutions that reduce
poverty and build shared prosperity in developing countries.
SECTION
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
World Bank
The World Bank (Bank), as opposed to the WBG, comprises two WBG institutions, namely, the IBRD
and IDA. The Bank provides loans, credits, and grants to developing countries to fund development
programs and projects. In addition, the Bank provides policy advice, and technical assistance to
support governments when designing and implementing development projects. The goals of Bank
financing are to promote poverty reduction and sustainable development in a manner that is aligned
with each country’s national development strategies.
The Bank’s Mission
“The World Bank has two goals: end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity in a
sustainable way.”
The Two Bank Institutions
IBRD—International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IBRD is a global development cooperative owned by its 189 member countries. As the
largest multilateral development bank in the world, it supports the WBG’s mission by providing
loans, guarantees, risk management products, and advisory services to middle-income and
creditworthy low-income countries, and by coordinating responses to regional and global
challenges.
IDA—International Development Association
IDA is the world’s largest multilateral source of concessional financing for the poorest
countries. It provides concessional development credits, grants, and guarantees to support
these countries’ efforts to increase economic growth, reduce poverty, and improve the living
conditions of the poor.
I BR D
International Bank
for Reconstruction
and Developm ent
IDA
International
D evelopm ent
A ssociation
I F C
International
Finance
C orporation
MIG A
M ultilateral
Investment
G uarantee A gency
I CSI D
International C entre
for Settleme nt of
Investme nt D isputes
Pr o v i des ﬁna nci ng
f o r  mi ddl e - i n co me
d e v e l o p i ng  co unt r i e s
Pr o v i des ﬁna nci ng
f o r  l o w - i n co me
d e v e l o p i ng  co unt r i e s
Pr o v i des p o lit i ca l  r i sk
i n sur a nce  a n d cr e d i t
g ua r a nt ees
C o nd uct s
in t e r na t i o n a l
a r b i t r ati o n t o se ttl e
i n v e st me nt  di sp ut e s
M obiliz e s p r i v a t e
se c t o r  i nv e st me nt
FIGURE 1 The five World Bank Group Institutions
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
Investment Project Financing
Investment Project Financing (IPF) is one of the ways in which Bank financing is provided to countries.
This financing may take the form of an IBRD loan or IDA credit/grant or guarantee. IPF supports
projects with defined development objectives, activities, and results, and disburses the financing
against specific eligible expenditures. IPF provides funding for activities that produce the physical/
social infrastructure necessary to reduce poverty and create sustainable development. To create this
infrastructure, Borrowers use the funds from IPF loans, credits, and grants to procure Goods, Works,
Consulting Services, and Non-Consulting Services in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement Policy
and Procurement Regulations.
Geographic Regions and Countries
The Bank’s operations are divided into seven geographic regions. The diagram in Map 1 shows the
regions and the indicative percentage of the Bank’s global commitments by region (for financial
year 2022).
11%
40%
18%
12%
13%
6%
L ati n  A m eri c a an d
th e C ari bbean
S u b -
S ah aran
Afri c a
S ou th A si a
E ast A si a an d  th e P ac i ﬁc
Europ e an d
C en tral  A si a
M i ddl e E ast
an d  N orth
Afri c a
REG IONS
1 . Afr i c a  Wes t er n  a n d  C en t r al (A FW)
2 . Afr i c a  East er n  a n d  S out her n  (A F E )
3 . East  A sia a nd  P a c i ﬁc  (E A P )
4 . E ur op e a nd  Cent r al A sia (E CA )
5 . La t i n  A m er i c a  a n d  C a r i bbea n  (LC R )
6 . M i ddl e E a s t  a n d  Nor t h Afr i c a  ( M NA )
7 . S out h A sia (S A R )
MAP 1 World Bank’s global commitments by region (2022)
Procurement Vision and
Core Principles
Procurement Vision
The Bank’s vision for IPF procurement is stated in the Procurement Policy:
“Procurement in IPF operations supports Borrowers to achieve value for money with integrity
in delivering sustainable development.”
This vision informs the Procurement Regulations and the Bank’s Procurement Framework. The Frame-
work has been designed as a modern, fit-for-purpose Procurement Framework. The Procurement
Regulations detail the many options available for Borrowers to tailor individual procurement processes
to meet operational needs and deliver the intended development results.
Core Procurement Principles
The Bank’s Core Procurement Principles, as listed in Figure 2, guide the Borrower’s decisions when
applying the Procurement Regulations.
SECTION
II
Val ue fo r mo ne y
E co n o my
Int egrity
E ﬃ ci e n cy
T ra nsp a re nc y
Fa i rne ss
WORLD BANK’S
CORE
PROCUREMENT
PRINCIPLES
Fi t-f o r-
Purp o se
FIGURE 2 The Bank’s Core Procurement Principles
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
The Core Procurement Principles are:
1. Value for Money (VfM): The principle of VfM endorses the effective, efficient, and economic
use of resources, which requires an evaluation of relevant costs and benefits, along with an
assessment of risks, and non-price attributes and/or life-cycle costs, as appropriate. Price
alone may not necessarily represent VfM.
2. Economy: The principle of economy takes into consideration such factors as sustainability,
quality, non-price attributes, and/or life-cycle costs, as appropriate, that support VfM. The principle
of economy permits integrating into the procurement process economic, environmental, and
social considerations that the Bank has agreed with the Borrower. It also permits augmenting
identified sustainability criteria with specific criteria in support of the Borrower’s own sustainable
procurement policy.
3. Integrity: The principle of integrity refers to the use of funds, resources, assets, and authority
according to the intended purposes and in a manner that is well informed, aligned with the
public interest, and aligned with broader principles of good governance. The Bank requires
that all parties involved in the procurement process and their personnel observe the highest
standard of ethics during the procurement process of Bank-financed contracts and refrain from
fraud and corruption (as defined in the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines).
4. Fit for Purpose: The principle of fit for purpose means tailoring the procurement approach and
methodology to meet the project development objectives and outcomes, taking into account
the context and the risk, value, and complexity of the procurement.
5. Efficiency: The principle of efficiency requires that procurement processes be proportional to
the value and risks of the underlying project activities. Procurement arrangements are generally
time-sensitive and strive to avoid delays.
6. Transparency: The principle of transparency requires that the Borrower and the Bank enable
appropriate reviews of procurement activities, supported by appropriate documentation and
disclosure. Transparency requires:
a.  that relevant procurement information be made publicly available to all interested parties,
consistently and in a timely manner, through readily accessible and widely available sources,
at reasonable or no cost
b.  that procurement activities be appropriately reported
c.  that confidentiality provisions in contracts be used only where justified.
7. Fairness: The principle of fairness refers to:
a.  equal opportunity for and treatment of Bidders/Proposers/Consultants
b.  the equitable distribution of rights and obligations between Borrowers and suppliers,
contractors, and Bidders/Proposers/Consultants
SECTION II: PROCUREMENT VISION AND CORE PRINCIPLES
c.  availability of credible mechanisms for addressing procurement-related complaints and
providing recourse.
The vision and Core Procurement Principles are set out in the Bank Policy. Bank staff use the Policy and
the Core Procurement Principles to inform their decisions on Borrowers’ requests for review or support,
particularly when there is no precise written rule or regulation that governs the matter in question.
Procurement Rules
Procurement under IPF is governed by either the Procurement Regulations or Guidelines. Which set
of rules applies to any given project depends on the date when the project was approved by the
Bank. This distinction relates to the introduction of the Bank’s Procurement Framework on July 1,
2016, which modernized procurement policy and rules for IPF-funded projects and introduced the
Procurement Regulations.
1. Guidelines (pre-July 2016)
IPF projects that were approved prior to July 1, 2016, are usually governed by the Bank’s
Procurement Guidelines (for Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services) and Consultant
Guidelines (for the selection and employment of Consultants). If you are involved with such
a project, you need to understand the appropriate Guidelines, as they are different from the
Regulations.
Pre-July 1, 2016 Policy, Guidelines, and Documents
2. Procurement Regulations (post-July 1, 2016)
Under the new Procurement Framework, IPF-funded Projects that were approved by the Bank
on or after July 1, 2016, are governed principally by the Procurement Regulations.
Post-July 1, 2016 Procurement Framework
Financing Agreement
The rules (either Guidelines or Regulations) that apply to a particular project are specified in the proj-
ect’s financing agreement. Make sure you follow the stipulated rules, including the specific edition
of the Guidelines or Regulations that apply to the project, or the Bank may decline to finance the
resulting contract.
Governance
SECTION
III
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
10
Focus of this Guidance
This Guidance is primarily intended for projects subject to the Procurement Regulations. However,
several aspects of the Guidance are also relevant for projects subject to the Guidelines.
Roles and Responsibilities
Borrower
The Borrower is responsible for carrying out procurement activities financed by the Bank in accordance
with the financing agreement signed between the Bank and the Borrower. In particular, the Borrower
must use funds only for the purpose for which they were granted. Other responsibilities include:
1. planning the procurement
2. preparing a procurement strategy for the project, as defined in the Project Procurement Strategy
for Development (PPSD)
3. inviting offers from the market
4. evaluating offers and determining the Most Advantageous Bid/Proposal (MABP)
5. awarding, signing, and managing contracts.
Bank
To ensure that funds are used only for the purpose for which they were granted, the Bank provides
Borrowers with procurement implementation support and oversight for each project. Implementation
support includes providing training and advice to the Borrower. The Bank conducts its procurement
oversight function in order to discharge its fiduciary responsibilities, as required by the Bank’s Articles
of Agreement.
Prior and Post Reviews
This fiduciary responsibility entails the Bank conducting reviews of selected procurement activities
undertaken by the Borrower. A review may be either:
1. prior review: undertaken while the procurement activity is taking place, or
2. post review: undertaken after the procurement activity has been completed.
The purpose of the Bank’s review is to determine the extent to which the Borrower’s procurement
activities are in accordance with the financing agreement for the project, including the Procure-
ment Policy and Regulations, which are incorporated by reference in the financing agreement. The
Procurement Plan specifies whether a procurement is subject to prior or post review. The Bank
requires mandatory prior review where the value of the procurement is above certain thresholds.
These thresholds are detailed in Annex I of Bank Procedure.
SECTION III: GOVERNANCE
11
Prior Reviews
For procurements subject to prior review, the Bank reviews:
1. the PPSD and Procurement Plan for the project
2. the draft General Procurement Notice (GPN) and Specific Procurement Notices (SPNs) before
they are published
3. the Borrower’s draft Procurement Documents before they are issued to the Bidders/Proposers
4. the results of the evaluation of Bids/Proposals before they are communicated to the Bidders/
Proposers
5. the Borrower’s draft responses to procurement-related complaints before they are issued to
the complainant
6. the draft contracts before they are signed by the Borrower.
Unless otherwise agreed with the Bank, prior review will be undertaken for all Works procurements
under projects classified as high risk for Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)
that use SPDs.
Post Reviews
For procurements subject  to post review, the Borrower conducts the procurement process and
the Bank, on a sample basis, reviews the process to determine whether it has been conducted in
accordance with the financing agreement.
For further details of the Bank’s procurement oversight, see Annex II of the Procurement Regulations.
Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support
The Bank may also provide the Borrower with Hands-on Expanded implementation Support (HEIS).
This support may be provided where the Borrower is deemed by the Bank to be:
1. in urgent need of assistance because of a natural or man-made disaster or conflict, or
2. experiencing capacity constraints because of being a fragile or small state.
Where the Bank provides HEIS to the Borrower, the Borrower remains responsible for conducting
the procurement.
Eligibility
The Bank permits eligible firms and individuals from all countries to offer Goods, Works, Consulting
Services, and Non-Consulting Services for Bank-financed projects. In accordance with the Regulations,
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
12
a Borrower shall not deny a Bidder/Proposer participation in a procurement, or award of a contract, for
reasons unrelated to:
1. the Bidder’s/Proposer’s capability and resources to successfully perform the contract, or
2. a conflict-of-interest situation covered under the Procurement Regulations (Paragraphs 3.14 to 3.17).
Exceptions
1. Country
A Borrower may deny a Bidder/Proposer the right to participate or to be awarded a contract if:
a. the Bidder/Proposer is from a country, or the Goods are manufactured in a country, and
i. the Borrower’s law or regulations prohibit commercial relations with that country (provided
that the Bank is satisfied that the exclusion does not preclude effective competition), or
ii. if the procurement is to be implemented across jurisdictional boundaries (i.e., the
procurement involves more than one country). Exclusion of a Bidder/Proposer on this
basis by one country may apply if the Bank and all the other countries involved in the
procurement agree, or
iii. in complying with a decision of the United Nations Security Council, the Borrower’s laws
prohibit the import of Goods from that country, or prohibit payments to a country or to a
person or entity in that country.
2. State-Owned Enterprise
State-Owned Enterprises or institutions (SOEs) outside the Borrower’s country are eligible to
participate. SOEs of the Borrower’s country are not normally eligible to participate. However,
they may be eligible if they can establish that they:
a.  are legally and financially autonomous, and
b.  operate under commercial law, and
c.  are not under supervision by the agency contracting them.
However, when the Goods, Works, or Services provided by SOEs (including state-owned
universities, research centers, or institutions) are of a unique and exceptional nature, or when
their participation is critical to the project, the Bank may exceptionally agree to the Borrower’s
contracting them, on a case-by-case basis.
3. Anticorruption Disqualification
A firm or individual is not eligible where it has been sanctioned and declared ineligible under
the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines (see Procurement Regulations Annex IV, Fraud and
Corruption). For the listing of ineligible firms and individuals, see the Bank’s website.
SECTION III: GOVERNANCE
13
The Borrower may request that the Bank agree to exclude a firm or individual that is under
a legal sanction of debarment in its country. The Bank must be satisfied that the debar-
ment relates to fraud or corruption, and that the judicial proceeding provided adequate due
process.
4. SEA/SH Disqualification
The Bank may disqualify a firm from being awarded a contract, financed in whole or in part by
the Bank, for a period of two years if the firm has been determined to be noncompliant with its
contractual SEA/SH Prevention and Response obligations. The determination of noncompliance
shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in the applicable SPD.
A firm disqualified by the Bank for noncompliance with contractual SEA/SH Prevention and
Response obligations shall be excluded from being awarded a contract to be financed in whole
or in part by the Bank. (Refer to the Procurement Regulations Paragraphs 3.24 and 3.34.)
Integrity
Application
In line with the Core Procurement Principle of integrity, the Bank requires that all parties involved
in the procurement process and their personnel observe the highest standard of ethics during the
procurement process and refrain from fraud or corruption.
The Bank will reject a Borrower’s proposal for award if it determines that the firm or individual recom-
mended (including any of its staff, agents, suppliers, or employees) has, directly or indirectly, engaged
in fraud or corruption in competing for the contract in question.
Bank’s Audit and Inspection Rights
The Bank requires that Borrowers include a clause in the procurement document requiring that
Bidders/Proposers and Contractors/Consultants (including their sub-Contractors, sub-Consultants,
agents, and personnel) permit the Bank to inspect and audit all accounts, records and other doc-
uments relating to the procurement process, selection, and/or contract execution. The Bank may
appoint auditors to act on its behalf. For further details, see Annex IV of the Procurement Regulations.
Sanctions and Remedies
The Bank may exercise various sanctions and remedies where fraud and corruption have been
detected. These sanctions and remedies can be found:
1. in the “Legal Remedies” in the financing agreement for each project
2. in the “Legal Remedies” in the contracts between the Borrower and the Contractor/Consultant
3. in the Procurement Regulations, Annex IV, Fraud and Corruption.
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
14
The Bank may sanction a firm or individual that has been found by the Bank to have engaged in
fraud or corruption in relation to a Bank-financed project. In relation to a Borrower, the Bank may
declare a misprocurement if the Bank determines at any time that a representative of the Borrower
has engaged in fraud or corruption during the procurement process, selection, and/or execution of
the contract in question.
15
Procurement Process Overview
The Procurement Process is defined in the Procurement Regulations as:
“the process that starts with the identification of need and continues through planning, prepa-
ration of specifications/requirements, budget considerations, selection, contract award and
contract management.”
While each procurement is unique, all Procurement Processes broadly follow seven common stages.
Figure 3 is a simplified representation of the Procurement Process. It shows the common stages and
their usual sequencing. Actual procurements may differ.
Procurement Process
SECTION
IV
De velop  s tr ate g y
A ssess th e m ark et,  op erati n g
e n v i ron m en t,  an d  p roj ec t sp ec i ﬁc  ri sk s.
D eterm i n e a ﬁt- f or- p u rp ose
p roc u rem en t approac h (PPS D ) .
Invi t e  o ﬀ e r s
Pub lish B i ddi n g  D oc u m en ts an d
i n v i te oﬀ ers f rom  th e m ark et.
Answ er an y q u esti on s ari si n g .
M an ag e  con tr ac t
F i n aliz e C on trac t M an ag em en t P l an
an d  i m plem en t m on i tori n g ,  eval u ati on ,
an d  p aym en t system s.  Ensu re b oth
p arti es m eet th ei r ob lig ati on s.
E va l u a te  o ﬀ e r s
A ssess oﬀ ers b ased  on  th e
p u b lish ed  ev al u ati on  c ri teri a.
D eterm i n e m ost A d v an tag eou s
B i d /P rop osal .
Cr e ate  th e  p l an
P rep are a d etailed  p l an  of  th e
p roc u rem en t p roc ess an d  sc h ed u l e
ac ti vi ti es.
Rec ei v e oﬀ ers.  Rej ec t an y l at e oﬀ er.
Pub lic l y op en  oﬀ ers an d  rec ord
c on t en t s.  K eep  a rec ord  of  th e p roc ess
f or au d i t p u rp oses.
A wa r d  con tr act
I ssu e N oti c e of  I n ten ti on  to A w ard  th e
C on trac t.  D u ri n g  th e S tan d still P eri od
address q u eri es an d  an y c om plai n ts.
A w ard  c on t rac t ,  an d p u b lish C on trac t
A w ard  N oti c e.
Re ceive  oﬀ e r s
FIGURE 3 Summary of the Procurement Process
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
16
1. Develop Strategy
During the project preparation phase, the Borrower is required to prepare a Project Procurement
Strategy for Development (PPSD) for the project. The Bank has Guidance and a template for long-
form PPSDs and short-form PPSDs.
a.  Project Procurement Strategy for Development
The PPSD, summarized in Figure 4, analyzes and summarizes the various factors that influence
the Borrower’s procurement approach. The Borrower has some flexibility in designing the pro-
curement approach. The design should reflect the optimal way to conduct the procurement.
Designing the procurement optimally increases the likelihood of the mostly high-qualified Bid-
ders/Proposers submitting offers and facilitates the Borrower’s achieving VfM and of delivering
the desired development results. See: Procurement Guidance, Value for Money: Achieving
VfM in Investment Projects Financed by the Bank.
It is at the stage of writing the PPSD that the Borrower decides on the types of Evaluation Criteria
that will be applied to each major contract, including the application of Rated Criteria to the
non-price/technical/quality attributes of Bids/Proposals, as well as the proposed prioritization
and weightings of such attributes, and how quality and price will be combined to determine
the MABP. The decisions made at this stage then feed into the design of the Procurement Plan.
For Works procurements in projects classified as high-risk for SEA/SH, the Procurement Plan
shall also detail use of the applicable SPD for large Works. In addition, all Works procurements
in projects classified as high risk for SEA/SH shall have a Contract Management Plan.
The PPSD assessment covers the following:
i.  Operating Environment: The operating environment and how it may influence the participation
of potential Bidders/Proposers and the way in which the procurement will be conducted
ii.  Borrower’s Capacity and Track Record: Borrower’s previous experience, track record, and
capability in conducting similar procurements and in implementing similar projects. This
step includes a resourcing plan to complement the Borrower’s capacity as needed, which
may include the need for HEIS to be provided by the Bank
iii.  Market: Review of the market to understand its nature and how it functions in the operating
environment, including nationally, regionally, and internationally. This step includes assessing
the level of supply (i.e., the likely number of potential Bidders/Proposers), the degree of
competition among Bidders/Proposers, anticipated prices, the factors that influence price,
the level of demand in the market (i.e., the likely number of buyers, including how much they
buy and their level of influence on the market), and whether there is a shortage of supply or
of qualified suppliers.
b.  Procurement approach
From analyzing this information, the Borrower designs an appropriate procurement approach,
which details:
SECTION IV: BENCHMARKING USING INDICES
17
i. the type of requirements and specifications, which may be conformance- or performance-
based. Conformance requirements are detailed specifications of the Borrower’s precise
needs and the method for achieving them. Performance requirements outline the Borrower’s
desired outcomes and invite Bidders/Proposers to propose solutions to meet these needs,
thus facilitating innovation by the market
ii.  the type of contract
iii. how the Borrower will approach the market for each procurement to obtain offers from
the most high-qualified Bidders/Proposers, including whether the Borrower will include
national or international competition
iv.  the selection method that the Borrower will apply to request offers from Bidders/Proposers
(RFB, RFP, RFQ, other)
v.  the evaluation and qualification criteria that will be used to compare the offers received and
identify the Bidder/Proposer that submits the MABP
vi.  a Contract Management Plan outlining how the contract will be monitored to ensure that
each party meets its obligations and that the VfM offered in the winning Bid is delivered
through the performance of the contract.
Bank staff then include a summary of the PPSD in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). The
PAD is used to seek the approval of the Bank’s Board to finance the project. It is important that
the PPSD be sufficiently detailed to explain and justify the Borrower’s selected procurement
approach. The level of detail in the PPSD should be proportionate to the complexity, risk, and
value of the planned procurement under the project.
P roj ec t  Ov er view1
St r a t eg i c  A ssessm en t  of Op er a t i n g
C o n t ex t  a n d  B o rro wer  C apab ilit y2
P roc u r em en t  Ris k  A n a lys i s  3
St a k eh o l d er  A n a lys i s4
P roc u r em en t  Ob j ec t ives5
P roc u r em en t  A pproa c h  Op t i o ns
a nd R ec o mmenda t i o n s
A ddr e sse s  t h e  f o llo w i n g  f a c t o rs:
R e q u i r e me n t s
C o n t r a c t  St r a teg y
Se l e c t i o n  M eth o d
E va l u a t i o n  M eth o d o l o g y
C o n t r a c t  Ma n a g e me n t
P r ef erred  Arra n g em en t  for Low -
V a l u e Low - Ris k  A c t i v i t i es7
Su mma r y  of PPSD  t o  support  the
p r epar a t i o n  of t h e PA D  b y  t h e B a n k8
A na lysis  a nd Assessm en ts Pr o cur em en t Appro a c h
P r oj ect  P r ocu r emen t  St rat eg y f or  D evel op men t  (PPS D )
Su mma r y  of C o n t en t s
FIGURE 4 Content of a PPSD
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
18
c. Approach to market options
The Procurement Regulations provide a variety of selection methods and market approach
options (see the Procurement Regulations, Section VI: Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting
Services, and Section VII: Consulting Services). This variety allows greater flexibility in design-
ing individual procurement approaches that are fit-for-purpose. Figure 5 demonstrates these
decision points.
BANK’s
STANDARD
PROCUREMENT
DOCUMENTS
APPLY
NATIONAL
PROCUREMENT
PROCEDURES/
DOCUMENTS
NORMALLY
APPLY
(as modiﬁed, if
required)
DEVELOPMENT
activity/need/requirement
DIRECT
SELECTION
Limited
Request
for Bids
Request
for
Quotations
Open
COMPETITIVE
PROCESSOR
OR
OROR
NATIONAL
MARKET
INTERNATIONAL
MARKET
Request
for
Proposal
FIGURE 5 Example of selection methods decision logic
d. Competitive versus non-competitive
The first step in determining the approach to the market is deciding whether to follow a com-
petitive or non-competitive procurement approach.
i.  Non-competitive approach : Direct selection: Proportional, fit-for-purpose, and VfM con -
siderations may require a direct selection approach wherein the Borrower approaches
and negotiates with only one firm. Direct selection may be appropriate if there is genuinely
only one qualified firm or there is justification to use a preferred firm. For circumstances
in which a non-competitive approach may be used, see Procurement Regulations Para-
graphs 6.8 to 6.10.
SECTION IV: BENCHMARKING USING INDICES
19
ii.  Competitive approach: Multiple firms are invited to participate in the procurement and sub-
mit offers. An open, competitive approach to the market is the Bank’s preferred approach
as it provides opportunities for all eligible, interested Bidders/Proposers to submit offers
and compete for the award of contract. Under an open competitive approach, the Borrower
may approach the national or international market, as justified in the PPSD.
e.  International versus national markets
i.  International competition: Approaching the international market may be appropriate when
the participation of foreign Bidders/Proposers will increase competition and deliver better
VfM. Open international competitive procurement with international advertising is the Bank’s
preferred approach for complex, high- risk, and/or high-value contracts. In international
procurements, national Bidders/Proposers are also eligible to participate.
For international competitive procurements, Borrowers are required to use the Bank’s Standard
Procurement Documents (SPDs). The range of SPDs covers the most widely used selection
methods (e.g., RFB, RFP) and procurement categories (Goods, Works, Consulting Services,
Non-Consulting Services) and a wide range of sector-specific documents.
Application of Rated Criteria for International Procurements
With a limited number of exceptions, all procurements that are subject to international
competition and use a Bank SPD are required to apply Rated Criteria with a two-
envelope procedure in the evaluation of Bids/Proposals. However, the use of Rated
Criteria is not required in the procurement of pharmaceuticals, vaccines, off-the-
shelf goods, educational materials, or commodities.
The Borrower/Proposer prepares the procurement documents based on the relevant Bank
SPD. The SPDs are available in English, French, and Spanish on the Bank’s website.
The procurement documents describe the requirements and provide instructions to
Bidders/Proposers on how to prepare and submit their Bids/Proposals. Accompanying
them is the Bank’s Guidance for Bidders/Proposers on Finding Business Opportunities
and Winning Contracts Financed by the World Bank.
ii.  National competition: For national open competitive procurement, the Borrower may use
its own national procurement procedures and procurement documents so long as they are
consistent with the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles and so long as the Borrower ensures
that the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework and contractual reme-
dies, set out in the financing agreement, apply and have been agreed with the Bank.
iii.  Approaching the national market may be appropriate under the following circumstances:
a. When the procurement is unlikely to attract foreign competition because of:
i.  the size and conditions of the market
ii.  the value of the contract (refer to Bank Guidance on thresholds for procurement
approaches and methods by country)
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
20
iii.  activities that are scattered geographically, spread over time, or are labor-intensive
iv.  the local availability of the Goods, Works, or Non-Consulting Services at prices
below the international market.
b.  The advantages of approaching the international market are clearly outweighed by the
administrative or financial burden involved.
c.  If foreign firms wish to participate in open national competitive procurement, they may
do so on the terms and conditions that apply to national firms.
f.  Selection Methods: Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services
The selection method is the procurement process by which the Borrower approaches the
market and invites offers (e.g., issues RFB, RFP). The Borrower selects the appropriate selection
method based on:
i.  the nature of the goods and services to be procured and the extent to which the Borrower
is able to specify its requirements
ii.  the level of competition in the market and how many suppliers in the market are able to
meet the Borrower’s requirements
iii. the estimated cost of the goods and services to be procured.
By way of an example, Figure 6 explains the selection methods for the procurement of Goods,
Works, and Non-Consulting Services.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS REQUEST FOR BIDS
competitive approach
usually used with conformance
speciﬁcations
market responds by oﬀering bids
proposals are usually compared
by scoring against the
requirements (rated criteria)
Award to the most advantageous
proposal
competitive approach
usually used with performance
speciﬁcations
REQUEST FOR QUOTATIONS
competitive approach
compares price of the oﬀers/
quotations
used when buying readily
available low-value goods and
services
Direct
Selection
(DS) DIRECT SELECTION
Request for
Proposals
(RFP)
Request for
Quotations
(RFQ)
Request
for Bids
(RFB) Bank
Selection
Methods
market responds by oﬀering
proposalsoﬀers are compared against the
requirements on a pass or fail
basis
award to the lowest price
conforming bid
non competitive way of
approaching and negotiating
with only one ﬁrm
used when there is only one
suitable ﬁrm or where there is
a good reason to approach only
one ﬁrm
FIGURE 6 Selection Methods for Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services
SECTION IV: BENCHMARKING USING INDICES
21
g. Other market approach options for complex and/or high-value procurement
The Procurement Regulations (Section VI) provide other market approach options for complex
and/or high-value procurements that are subject to international competitive procurement.
These market approaches are subject to the following requirements:
i.  For transparency, their use must have been pre-disclosed in the procurement document
issued to the prospective Bidders/Proposers,
ii.  The procurement is subject to the Bank’s prior review owing to the level of risk and com-
plexity, and
iii.  An independent probity assurance provider (prior agreed with the Bank) observes the
opening of offers and any negotiations to ensure that the processes are fair and that all
Bidders/Proposers are treated impartially.
These other market approach options are:
i.  Competitive dialogue: An interactive, multistage market approach option that allows dynamic
engagement with Bidders/Proposers. Competitive dialogue may be appropriate when there
is no solution currently available on the market, or when several alternative solutions exist
that could meet the Borrower’s requirements. It allows the Borrower and Bidders/Proposers
to discuss and further refine the detailed technical and commercial arrangements required
to support the solutions. It may also be appropriate where, as a result of the nature and
complexity of the procurement, the Borrower is not objectively able to define its require-
ments or adequately specify the legal and/or financial arrangements and contract. For
further guidance on how to undertake a competitive dialogue process, see Bank Guidance
on competitive dialogue.
ii.  Best and Final Offer (BAFO): A near final Bid in a multistage procurement process . After the
first stage, which determines which Bids/Proposals meet the Borrower’s requirements, the
next stage involves providing those Bidder/Proposers an opportunity to submit their Best and
Final Offer. BAFO is appropriate when the procurement process may benefit from Bidders/
Proposers having a final opportunity to improve their offers, including by reducing prices,
clarifying or modifying their offers, or providing additional information. It is normally particularly
effective when markets are known to be highly competitive and there is strong competitive
tension among Bidders/Proposers. See Bank Guidance on Negotiations and BAFO.
iii.  Negotiations: In international competitive procurements, negotiations may be conducted
following the evaluation of offers and before the award of contract. Negotiations may
involve negotiating the terms and conditions, price, social and environmental aspects, and
innovations. However, negotiations must not change the minimum requirements set out
in the procurement documents. Unlike BAFO, which is conducted with several Bidders/
Proposers in parallel, negotiations are undertaken first with the Bidder/Proposer deter-
mined by the Bank to have the best offer. Only if this negotiation is unsuccessful may the
Borrower negotiate with the next best ranked Bidder/Proposer. For further guidance on
BAFO, see Bank Guidance on Negotiations and BAFO.
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
22
h. Selection methods: Consulting Services
When contracting individuals or firms to provide Consulting Services, Borrowers follow the
approved selection methods for Consulting Services. For details of these methods, see
Section VII of the Procurement Regulations.
2. Plan the Procurement
The Borrower is also required to prepare a Procurement Plan (PP), which is informed by analysis
conducted and choices made in the PPSD. The PP is a detailed action plan that describes the pro-
curement activities and sets out the schedule of dates. The PP includes:
a.  a brief description of what is to be procured
b.  the cost estimate for the procurement
c. the selection method to be applied
d.  the time schedules for the key steps of the procurement process, from initiation of the procure-
ment to completion of contract implementation,
e.  the type of Bank review that will apply.
In preparing the PP, the Borrower uses the Bank’s online planning and tracking tool, called STEP
(Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement). The Bank then reviews and agrees to the PP
prior to completion of the loan negotiations; the final PP is then published on the Bank’s website. The
PP is a “living document.” This means that it i s designed to be updated regularly, at least annually
during project implementation. Any updates to the PP are subject to the Bank’s prior review.
3. Invite Offers
The Borrower informs the market of the procurement opportunity and invites Bids/Proposals through
an invitation (e.g., an invitation for Bids/Proposals). For procurements subject to open international
competition, the invitation is published:
a.  in a local newspaper of wide circulation and/or on a free access website, and
b.  on the UN Development Business website, and
c.  on the Bank’s external website.
The Borrower provides to interested Bidders/Proposers a procurement document that includes:
a.  the instructions to Bidders/Proposers on how to prepare and submit their offers, including an
explanation of how the MABP will be determined
b.  a description of the Borrower’s requirements
c.  standard forms to be completed by the Bidder/Proposer in preparing its offers, and
d.  the draft contract.
SECTION IV: BENCHMARKING USING INDICES
23
For procurements subject to international competition, Borrowers are required to use the Bank’s
SPDs. For procurements subject to the Bank’s prior review, the Borrower submits the procurement
document for the Bank’s review via STEP before inviting offers.
4. Receive and Open Offers
Borrowers should allow market participants sufficient time to review the requirements and prepare
and submit their offers. For procurements involving international competition, this time is usually at
least 30 business days from the date of publication of the SPN. During this period, Bidders/Proposers
may request clarification of the procurement documents or the Borrower’s requirements. Borrowers
should address such queries in a timely manner and share the responses with all potential Bidders/
Proposers.
Where Borrowers amend the procurement documents, the amendments should be sent to all poten-
tial Bidders/Proposers. For procurement subject to prior review, these amendments should be issued
only after the Bank’s review.
The procurement document specifies the address where offers are to be submitted and the time and
place they will be opened. Opening is usually in public. An exception to a public opening arises when
a closed opening may be justified with a BAFO, Competitive Dialogue, or Negotiations. A closed
opening is not open to the public. Instead, a probity assurance provider observes the opening to
ensure that the process is fair and ethical and that all Bidders/Proposers are treated impartially. The
probity assurance provider’s report is openly published later, at the time of the award of contract.
5. Evaluate Offers
Evaluation and qualification criteria are used by the Borrower to compare offers and determine
the MABP.
Evaluation criteria, and the method for applying them, must be established during the early stages
of the procurement. They must be published in the procurement documents issued to the Bidders/
Proposers. This requirement supports transparency and integrity in the procurement process. It is
essential that potential Bidders/Proposers understand the criteria by which their Bid/Proposal will
be judged, and what criteria are the least to most important to the Borrower. In this way Bidders/
Proposers will be better able to tailor their Bid/Proposal to meet the Borrower’s requirements.
Evaluation criteria should be proportionate and appropriate to the type, nature, market conditions,
complexity, risk, value, and objective of what is being procured. For further details on how to prepare
evaluation criteria, see Procurement Guidance, Evaluating Bids and Proposals.
The process to determine the MABP differs depending on the selection method used. There are two
main types of evaluation and qualification criteria.
a. Monetarily quantifiable criteria
When setting monetarily quantifiable Evaluation Criteria, the Procurement Documents shall
specify the relevant factors to be considered in the Bid/Proposal evaluation and the manner in
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
24
which they will be applied for the purpose of determining the evaluated financial cost of each
Bid/Proposal.
Examples of where monetarily quantifiable criteria may be applied to determine the total eval-
uated Bid/Proposal financial cost may include, among others:
i. margin of domestic preference (if agreed with the Bank)
ii.  time schedule adjustment
iii.  payment schedule adjustment
iv.  life-cycle costing
v.  functional guarantees min/max adjustment
vi.  adjustments for nonmaterial non-conformities
vii.  discounts.
Monetarily quantifiable criteria are most often used with an RFB selection method and a con-
formance specification.
b. Rated criteria
Use of Rated Criteria is mandatory for any Procurement Process subject to international com-
petition and for which a Bank SPD is used. However, use of Rated Criteria is not required in
the procurement of pharmaceuticals, vaccines, off-the-shelf goods, educational materials, or
commodities.
Use of Rated Criteria allows the Borrower to achieve VfM by ensuring that, in addition to
price, all relevant technical and qualitative non-price factors are taken into account in the
determination of the MABP.
Rated Criteria are best suited to procurements that use a performance specification, whereby
the Borrower specifies its desired outcomes and leaves the method of delivery of that outcome
to the Bidder/Proposer to propose in its Bid/Proposal. RFP procurement processes are best
suited to the use of a performance specification along with Rated Criteria.
Two-envelope process
In all cases where Rated Criteria are applied, the evaluation shall be conducted on the basis of
a two-envelope procedure. Technical bids are opened and evaluated first. Then the financial
envelopes of only those Bidders whose technical Bids are evaluated as responsive are opened
and evaluated.
c. Evaluation process
The Borrower must apply the criteria and methodology described in the procurement docu-
ments. No variation or inconsistent application is permitted. During the evaluation stage the
SECTION IV: BENCHMARKING USING INDICES
25
Borrower may seek clarifications from the Bidders/Proposers, provided such clarification does
not substantially alter the Bid/Proposal.
As part of the evaluation, if a Bid/Proposal is suspected of being “abnormally low,” there is
a prescribed process that the Borrower must follow. “Abnormally low” means that the offer
price, in combination with other elements of the offer, is so low that it raises material concerns
as to the Bidder’s/Proposer’s capability to perform the contract for that price. The Borrower
must check the price with the Bidder/Proposer by seeking written clarification. If the Bidder/
Proposer fails to demonstrate its capability to deliver the contract for the offered price, the
Borrower rejects the Bid/Proposal. For further details, see Procurement Guidance: Abnormally
Low Bids and Proposals.
The evaluation process is confidential and should not be disclosed to any persons not involved
in the evaluation and award decision process until the Borrower’s Notice of Intention to Award
has been transmitted to all Bidders/Proposers.
The Borrower prepares a report of the evaluation process. For procurements subject to the
Bank’s prior review, the evaluation report is subject to review by the Bank before the Borrower
communicates its intention to award the contract.
6. Contract Award
The award of the contract is made to the Bidder/Proposer that submits the MABP.
a.  Where Rated Criteria are not used, the MABP is:
the Bid/Proposal of the Bidder/Proposer that meets the qualification criteria and whose Bid/
Proposal has been determined to be:
i.  substantially responsive to the RFBs/RFPs document,
ii.  the lowest evaluated cost.
b.  Where Rated Criteria are used, the MABP is:
the Bid/Proposal of the Bidder/Proposer that meets the qualification criteria and whose Bid/
Proposal has been determined to be:
i.  substantially responsive to the RFBs/RFPs document,
ii.  the highest-ranked Bid/Proposal, based on a combination of price and technical/quality/
non-price criteria.
c.  In Consulting Services, the MABP is the best evaluated Proposal.
At the contract award phase, the Borrower cannot simply sign the contract with the success-
ful Bidder/Prop oser, as several steps must first be completed to ensure transparency and
accountability in the procurement process.
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
26
Notification of Intention to Award
Following the decision to award the contract to the Bidder/Proposer with the MABP,, the Borrower
promptly sends a written notification of its intention to award the contract to each Bidder/Proposer
that submitted a Bid/Proposal. This is called the Notification of Intention to Award. The Notification
must be sent to all Bidders/Proposers at the same time and by the quickest means available (e.g., by
email). Sending the Notification of Intention to Award initiates the Standstill Period.
Standstill Period
The Standstill Period is a period of ten business days following transmission of the Notification of
Intention to Award.
During this period there is a pause in the process, during which the Borrower is prohibited from
entering into a contract with the successful Bidder/Proposer. The purpose of the Standstill Period is
to allow unsuccessful Bidders/Proposers an opportunity to understand why they were not successful,
(they may request a debriefing) and to provide them an opportunity to submit a Complaint about the
decision to award the contract, if relevant.
The Standstill Period commences on the day following
the transmission of the Notice of Intention to Award
to all Bidders/Proposers.
Transmit Notices of
Intention to Award
The Standstill Period expires at midnight
on the tenth day (unless extended).
BIDDER TO REQUEST
A DEBRIEF WITHIN
3 BUSINESS DAYS
BORROWER TO PROVIDE DEBRIEF WITHIN 5
BUSINESS DAYS OF RECEIPT OF TIMELY REQUEST
A complaint may be submitted at anytime during the Standstill Period
Standstill Period (10 Business Days) Award the contract on or
after 11
th
day
BUSINESS DAYS 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
FIGURE 7 The Standstill Period
There are procedures for requesting a debriefing and submitting a complaint. The Standstill Period
will be automatically extended if a Bidder/Proposer has requested a debriefing on time, but the
Borrower has been unable to provide the debriefing on time.
For procurements subject to prior review, the Borrower’s draft response to a complainant is sub-
mitted for the Bank’s prior review before it is issued to the complainant. For information on the
Standstill Period, debriefing, and complaints, see Procurement Guidance: Procurement-Related
Complaints.
SECTION IV: BENCHMARKING USING INDICES
27
w. Expiry of Standstill Period
Upon expiry of the Standstill Period, after complaints have been addressed (if appropriate), the
Borrower may proceed to award and sign the contract with the successful Bidder/Proposer. The
Borrower does this by transmitting the notification of award to the successful Bidder/Proposer.
x. Contract Award Notice
The Borrower shall publish a public notice of the award of contract. This is called the Contract
Award Notice. There are rules about what information must be included in the notice (see
Procurement Regulations 5.93 to 5.95). The notice should be published:
i.  on the Borrower’s website with free access, or if not available, in at least one newspaper
of national circulation, or
ii.  in the official gazette.
For international competitive procurements, the notice must also be published:
i.  on the UN Development Business website, or
ii.  on the Bank’s website.
The Borrower submits the Contract Award Notice to the Bank for publication through STEP.
7. Contract Management
Successful delivery of contracts requires systematic planning and monitoring to ensure that both
parties to the contract are aware of their responsibilities and perform them in a timely manner. To
support these activities, the Borrower prepares a Contract Management Plan. The plan should be
finalized before contract implementation starts. The key objectives of contract management are to
ensure that the contract is:
1. delivered on time, at the right place, and in the right quantity
2. performed to the required specifications, standards, and quality
3. completed within the agreed price.
For more information, see the Bank’s Guidance:
1. Contract Management, General Principles
2. Contract Management, Practice.
Simplified Process for Emergencies and Capacity Constraints
The Procurement Regulations allow greater flexibility and simplification for procurements occurring in
relation to emergency situations or when the Borrower has certain capacity constraints. Emergency
situations are those in which assistance is urgently needed owing to a natural or man-made disaster
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
28
or conflict. Capacity constraints may result from fragility or specific vulnerabilities as a small state. Such
situations often merit a quick procurement response to address the emergency or a customized
approach to address the capacity constraint.
In these situations, the Regulations permit the Borrower to tailor its procurement approach to support
a fast response. It can determine the most fit-for-purpose selection method, contract arrangement,
and market approach option that will deliver the best possible procurement result in the response
time required. For example, it is possible to use UN agencies to achieve results on the ground by
delivering Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services, and Consulting Services. The Bank may also
provide HEIS to supplement the Borrower’s procurement capacity.
For further details, see Bank Guidance Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints
29
Procurement Framework
The World Bank’s Procurement Framework was launched in July 2016. It modernizes the World Bank’s
procurement policy and maximizes the strategic role of procurement in achieving key development
goals. The Framework promotes tailored procurement approaches that emphasize choice, quality,
and achieving Value for Money with integrity, delivering sustainable development and enabling tailored
adaptation to country contexts.
Mandatory Documents
Regulations: Procurement Regulations for Investment Project Financing (IPF) Borrowers
Policy: Procurement Policy in IPF
Directive: Procurement Directive
Procedures: Procurement Procedure
Procurement Guidance
A range of user support material has been developed to assist implementation of the Procurement
Framework. Guidance can be found on the Procurement Framework webpage and includes informa-
tion about the following topics:
Abnormally Low Bids and Proposals
Bank Reviews – Post Review, Independent Procurement Review, and Integrated Fiduciary Reviews
Competitive Dialogue: How to undertake a Competitive Dialogue Procurement Process
Complaints – Procurement-Related Complaints
Conflict of Interest (see Template section below for declaration template)
Contract Management, General Principles
Contract Management, Practice
ESHS – Environmental, Social, Health & Safety in Procurement
Additional Resources
ANNEX
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE FOR BORROWERS: PROCUREMENT UNDER WORLD BANK INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING
30
Evaluating Bids and Proposals Using Rated Criteria
Framework Agreements
Guide for Borrowers – Procurement under World Bank IPF
Guide for Suppliers – Finding Business Opportunities
HEIS – Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support
Health – A Buyer’s Guide to Medical Diagnostic Equipment
Health – Engaging an Expert Consultant for Medical Diagnostic Equipment
Negotiations and BAFO – in Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services
Noncompliance in IPF Operations
PPSD Guidance Long Form – Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PPSD Guidance Short Form – Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PPP – Public Private Partnerships
SEA/SH – Prevention and Response Measures in Procurement Q&As
Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints
SPDs An Overview – Standard Procurement Documents
Supply Chain Management
Supply Chain Management – An introduction and practical toolset
Sustainable Procurement
Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods by Country
Value for Money
Templates
A range of user tools and templates is available on the Procurement Framework webpage . These
include the following:
Contract Price Adjustment Computation Workbook (Excel)
PPSD Template – Long Form
PPSD Template – Short Form
GPN Template
ANNEX A: ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
31
Textual Part of Procurement Plan
Letter of Acceptance of Anti-Corruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework
Requests for Expressions of Interest sample format
Conflict of Interest Declaration Template
Standard Procurement Documents
Learning
E-Learning Programs for Borrowers
Contact the World Bank
Borrowers may contact the World Bank to seek further information and guidance. The first point of
contact should be the Bank’s local office in the Borrower’s country, if there is one. The address for
each local office is available on the “Where We Work” web page:
1. Navigate to the web page Where We Work
2. Select the appropriate country
3. On the Country page, under the “Overview” tab, scroll to the bottom of the page, where Country
Office Contact information is listed.
Borrowers may also contact the Task Leader for the project, who will connect them to relevant World
Bank procurement staff and further resources.
Y ou may contact any Bank staff member by calling: +1 202-473-1000
For additional information, such as Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs), Guidance, briefing,
training and e-learning materials see www.worldbank.org/procurement